# PHIL 1000 - 03 - Objections to the Ontological Argument

[Slide 1] Objections to the Ontological Argument

[Slide 2] Review of the Ontological Argument Three Objections The greatest-possible-island objection The existence-isn’t-a-property objection The sneaky definition objection

[Slide 3] The Ontological Argument

[Slide 4] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t

[Slide 5] The Greatest Being God God is the greatest possible being – the being than which none greater can be conceived . Here’s the definition that we’ll be working with in the Ontological Argument. 2 points need to made here. By “great”, we mean “better” or “more admirable” or “more perfect” – God is the perfectest being. Also bear in mind that what’s relevant here is possibility, rather than actuality. So the class of things than which God is greater is all the possible things; all the things not in category 3, in other words.

[Slide 6] Let’s define a great-making property as follows, a great-making property is such that when we consider adding this property to a being which lacks it, we invariably make that being greater.

[Slide 7] For Anselm, existence is a great-making property .

[Slide 8] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument

[Slide 9] As written, the Ontological Argument is valid, so we have 6 options (1) Reject P1 (2) Reject P2 (3) Reject P3 (4) Reject P4 (5) Reject P5 (6) Accept the conclusion

[Slide 10] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible ? C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property ? C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) ? The Ontological Argument Of those 6 options, only 3 of them seem actively viable. P1 seems like a logical truth. (Assuming we’ve done our possible being metaphysics correctly) P3 & P5 are both definitions. It typically doesn’t make sense to say that a definition is false, unless the definition is reporting on the world – unless the definition has an empirical truth value. The def in P3 is a logical entailment. An analytic truth. Nothing to argue with there. What about P5? In general I think, here and in other cases, it just doesn’t make a ton of sense to argue with a definition.

[Slide 11] Person 1: Let’s stipulatively define a ‘bug’ as a winged insect > 2 cm long . Person 2: What? That’s wrong. That’s not what a bug is. To illustrate why that is, I’ve written you a brief, 1 Act Play.

[Slide 12] Person 1: Sure, but, just for now, though? Can we use it to mean that for now ? Person 2: No. We can’t. ‘Bug’ doesn’t mean that.

[Slide 13] Person 1: Well, let’s invent a word. ‘Blozon’ means winged insect > 2 cm long . Person 2: No. You can’t just do that! That definition is false, too! THE END Hopefully, you can see: Person 2 isn’t really making sense. There’s nothing illegitimate about temporarily and stipulatively defining terms. And ther’s def nothign wrong with makign up new words and assigning them new defs.

[Slide 14] Let’s stipulatively define ‘God’ as the greatest possible being . This is what Anselm is doing. It just doesn’t make a ton of sense to argue with him about that. If it bothers you that he’s co-opted the word ‘God’, you can simply replace all instances of the word ‘God’ in your head with the word ‘blozon’ Anselm is arguing that the greatest possible being, Blozon, actually exists.

[Slide 15] Practically speaking, then, we have 3 options (1) Reject P1 (2) Reject P2 (argue that God is impossible) (3) Reject P3 (4) Reject P4 (argue that existence isn’t great-making) (5) Reject P5 (6) Accept the conclusion

[Slide 16] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible ? C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property ? C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) ? The Ontological Argument So these are our 3 options.

[Slide 17] Objections

[Slide 18] The Greatest Possible Island Obj

[Slide 19] Gaunilo of Marmoutiers (1100’s C.E.) famously argued that we can use the Ontological Argument to prove that the Greatest-Possible-Island exists – thus showing the Argument to be bad.

[Slide 20] The Greatest Possible Island The Greatest Possible Island (GPI) is that island than which none greater can be conceived . Here’s the definition that we’ll be working with in the Greatest Possible Island version of the Ontological Argument. 2 points need to made here. By “great”, we mean “better” or “more admirable” or “more perfect” – God is the perfectest being. Also bear in mind that what’s relevant here is possibility, rather than actuality.

[Slide 21] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor GPI? Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales GPI? Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs GPI? Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t

[Slide 22] P1) The GPI is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) The GPI is not logically impossible C1) The GPI is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine it!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, the GPI is the greatest possible island C3) GPI is not a Category 2 entity (else it would lack a great-making property ) C4) So the GPI must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. the GPI actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument – Island Edition

[Slide 23] P1) If the original Ontological Argument is sound, then so is the Island Edition P2) The Island Edition is not sound. (SPOILER – there is no GPI) C) So, the Ontological Argument is unsound, too Gaunilo’s Objection The Island Edition ISNT GAUNILO’S OBJ. It’s just an illustration. This is his actual argument. Important note: There’s nothing special about islands. We could make the same point by picking a different object – a bread machine, a stick, a bazooka.

[Slide 24] P1) If the original Ontological Argument is sound, then so is the Island Edition P2) The Island Edition is not sound. (SPOILER: there is no GPI!) C) So, the Ontological Argument is unsound, too Gaunilo’s Objection Quiz QUIZ: What premise does Gaunilo object to? This is a trick question! Gaunilo isn’t rejecting any of the premises. There’s a sense in which this objection is only ½ of a reply to the Ontological Argument. Gaunilo’s objection seems to show that there’s something wrong with the Argument – there must be! You can use it to prove all sorts of crazy and false things! – but it doesn’t tell us what is wrong. Which premise is he rejecting? What’s the mistake in the argument? We don’t know.

[Slide 25] The Existence-Isn’t-A-Property Obj

[Slide 26] Immanuel Kant (1724 - 1804) famously argued that the Ontological Argument fails because existence is not a property. (And thus, cannot be a great-making property )

[Slide 27] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument Visually, here’s what Kant’s doing – he’s telling us to reject P4.

[Slide 28] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Kant wants to say something like this. First we should ask: What is a property anyway?

[Slide 29] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Imagine a baby seal.

[Slide 30] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it brown.

[Slide 31] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it small.

[Slide 32] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it existing. (Don’t imagine it doing stuff. That’s different. Keep everything the same in your imagination, except add the property of existence.)

[Slide 33] Kant thinks this is incoherent. Existence cannot be conceptually added or subtracted from an entity. Existence is rather a precondition for an entity’s having properties .

[Slide 34] Suppose existence is a property . If so, non-existence must be one too . That means we can say things like, “Sherlock has the property of non-existence .” But is that coherent? Sherlock doesn’t exist! How can he have anything at all? Try this. That’s Kant’s objection. I’m not sure this one succeeds, but it’s been very influential historically.

[Slide 35] The Sneaky Definition Obj

[Slide 36] Consider the leprechaun. A clear Category 2 entity.

[Slide 37] Let’s define a new kind of leprechaun. A real-leprechaun , we’ll say, is a leprechaun that isn’t just merely possible but that actually exists. (an R.L. for short)

[Slide 38] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible (we can imagine an R.L.!) C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity – i.e. real-leprechauns exist . The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition So…. obviously that’s bullshit. Something’s gone wrong. This argument is defective. But WHY? What’s the defect? Where did we screw up?

[Slide 39] The mistake seems to be this. We also know they aren’t in Category 1 . (SPOILER: Leprechauns don’t exist) Thus, they’re impossible. R.L.s are in Category 3 . By definition, real-leprechauns don’t belong in Category 2 . It helps to try to assemble our facts about Real Leprechauns in a different order. Fact #1: Real Leprechauns are by definition not in Category 2 Fact #2: There are no leprechauns in reality. So they aren’t in Category 1 Conclusion: Real Leprechauns are in Category 3: the are impossible beings.

[Slide 40] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Ed. Quiz QUIZ: Which premise of the argument should we reject?

[Slide 41] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition Look at premise 2. It looks innocent, but it’s not.

[Slide 42] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition Look at premise 2. It looks innocent, but it’s not. Since R.L. are either real or impossible, by definition, when we accept P2 be automatically grant that Real-leprechauns exist. We shouldn’t do that – That’s a mistake! Real-leprechauns are, apparently, impossible. (That’s weird and surprising. They don’t seem impossible! But they are. Because they aren’t real. And they aren’t merely-possible by definition. Thus, the way that we’ve defined real leprechaun forces them into Category 3. It’s not obvous that we’ve done that, just by glancing at the definition, but it’s true. Weird!

[Slide 43] So too with the Ontological Arg. By Anselm’s def, God isn’t merely possible . (at least, if we accept that existence is great-making .) That is, by definition God is either Category 1 or Category 3 . (either real or impossible) But then, we should not accept P2 . It looks innocent, but it’s not. (b/c Anselm’s definition is sneaky .) Anselm is saying, “Let’s define God as real or impossible. Since we can imagine God, God is not impossible. So, She’s real.”

[Slide 44] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible (is not Category 3 ) P3) By definition, God is not Category 2 C) So, God is in Category 1 , is real The Ontological Argument (un-sneaky’d) Not a good argument! No one should accept P2, given the definition in P3. What the R.L. case teaches us is that just because we can imagine something doesn’t mean that thing is possible. We seem to be able to imagine Real Leprechauns, even though they are impossible. (b/c they don’t actually exist and by definition aren’t merely possible.) Likewise, just because we seem to be able to imagine God as the greatest possible being, that doesn’t mean God – as Anselm defines Her – isn’t impossible.
