# PHIL 1000 - 18 - Civility

[Slide 1] Righteous Incivility In this unit, we’re going to shift gears and start doing ethics. Where Epistemology is concerned with knowledge, justification, evidence, and rational belief, Ethics is concerned with the nature of the right and the good: the rules of right action, the components of virtuous and vicious character, the details of what we owe to each other.

[Slide 2] Background: civility and disagreement Righteous incivility on issues of social consensus Righteous incivility on issues on ongoing social disagreement A case of righteous incivility Two arguments against righteous incivility The Asymmetry Argument The Argument for Self-Doubt

[Slide 3] Previously, we considered disagreement as an interesting epistemic problem. “What’s the rational thing to believe when confronted by disagreement?”

[Slide 4] Disagreement also gives rise to an interesting ethical problem. “What’s the correct way to behave when confronted by disagreement?” OR “ What rules or norms must we follow in communicating our disagreement?” Notice, these questions are about how we should treat each other, what we owe each other, what counts as ethically acceptable behavior. It’s not about how we should reason, what we should believe.

[Slide 5] You may recall, the syllabus for this class includes some answers to this question. I’ve asked you to be kind and supportive and charitable and civil . civility =df a symbolic demonstration or display of prosocial values (respect, consideration, toleration) in one’s speech or behavior This is what I want to talk about today.

[Slide 6] Civility is all about the style, tone, or manner of your communication. (that’s why they’re called “manners”, you know?) The right manner can symbolically communicate profound respect. (Something like, “Let me affirm that I respect you as a person and thinker. I see that you’re trying your best to be honest, curious, humble, and deliberative. I value your thoughts and contributions, and I will consider what you have to say.”)

[Slide 7] Certainly and obviously, the internet is cesspit of incivility. People on the internet are SO MEAN to each other. Sometimes, it’s almost more surprising to find measured, civil conversation than to find shit-slinging invective.

[Slide 8] The incivility goes all the way to the top! Trump, e.g., insists on calling his political opponents by rude nicknames “Crooked Hillary,” “Low Energy Jeb”, “Sleepy Joe Biden” Very often his oppenents are rude right back. His opponents tend to be rude in return.

[Slide 9] This trend appears offline, too. A recent (2020, FIRE Free Speech Survey) survey of students at Ivy League schools found that 21% expressed some level of acceptance for using violence to stop campus speech. 37% of college students nationwide expressed some level of support for physical blocking other students from accessing campus speaking events, with a speaker they disagree with. 61% of college students nationwide expressed some level of support for shouting down campus speakers with views they oppose. (It was hard to find good numbers from 15-20 years ago to compare, unfortunately.)

[Slide 10] I take it we should mostly be civil in voicing our disagreements since, A functional democracy requires mutual respect among citizens We expect respect from others Incivility is often not persuasive Let me offer a few arguments for why being civil should be our default response to disagreement (1) A society in which people who disagree with one another cannot even productively communicate is not long for this world. (2) Think about how it feels for someone to be explicitly rude or mean or disrespectful to you – to tell you that you’re stupid or a monster. To tell you that you don’t deserve respect or consideration. I am inclined to feel wronged when I am treated that way. I feel like the other person has treated me inappropriately and owes me an apology. Presumably, other people feel that way too. So that’s a reason to mostly be civil

[Slide 11] “ It takes a hardy moral character to receive a slap as a summons to be good. But why would I think that one so low in my opinion will not just rise but soar to heights of circumspection, receiving disrespect as a provocation to be better? If she’s bad enough to need a punch, she’s not likely good enough to take it well and change. ” – Amy Olberding This is how Olberding puts it. *chefs kiss* This paragraph is so good, it belongs in a museum. Basically, the thought is: If your goal is to convince someone else that they’re wrong, it simply doesn’t make much sense to be uncivil. Basically no one responds to rudeness positively. A punch in the face is not typically understood as an invitation to be a better person.

[Slide 12] I take it we should mostly be civil in voicing our disagreements , but... should we always be civil ? is it ever morally better to be uncivil ? is there any such thing as righteous incivility ? Here’s the big question for the day.

[Slide 13] On righteous incivility

[Slide 14] “ Sometimes a moral good is won in rudeness . For even as we need to respect humanity, valuing human beings can sometimes require disrespecting some of them, precisely the ones who deny or damage our shared humanity. [The risk of civility is that] we become unthinking conformists to superficial forms of niceness that would sacrifice higher values. ” – Amy Olberding

[Slide 15] Amy Olberding It is sometimes good to be uncivil toward people who hold outrageous moral beliefs that almost everyone rejects. Here’s Olberding’s thesis

[Slide 16] It’s almost certainly OK to be uncivil with Nazis. That’s righteous incivility. That is to say, If you meet a neo-Nazi, you probably don’t need to show them respect, toleration, and consideration. You don’t need to communicate, either explicitly or implicitly, that you respect them as a person and thinker, that you think they’re trying their best to be honest, curious, humble, and deliberative. That you value their thoughts and contributions, and will consider what they have to say

[Slide 17] It’s OK to be uncivil with a slavery supporter. That’s righteous incivility. Similarly if you meet someone wants to defend slavery as a just institution, very plausibly do not need to show them respect, toleration, and consideration. If anything, it would seem to be positively bad to show them consideration, to treat their view as somehow “on the table,” as somehow worthy of discussion and consideration.

[Slide 18] It’s righteous incivility to be uncivil with a defender of pedophilia. Why? Again, (a) Pretty much everyone agrees that pedophilia morally awful. (b) it’s really important for us to protect that common consensus. It’s really important that everyone continue to believe that pedophilia is really awful. Thus, we’re justified in being disrepectful to people who try to defend the practice. We are justified in not giving their views fair consideration.

[Slide 19] Amy Olberding It is sometimes good to be uncivil toward people who hold outrageous moral beliefs that almost everyone rejects. Quiz QUIZ: Can you think of any other moral beliefs like that? That is, beliefs that are so outrageous and so universally rejected, that it seems appropriate to deny the people who hold those views civil treatment? (Maybe: People who deny the equal moral status of women People who think that white people are or deserve to be in charge of the world People who think Jewish people (or some other ethnic groups) are inherently evil)

[Slide 20] But precisely because most people agree on these issues, these kinds of cases are uncommon . Mostly, our disagreements concern issues of ongoing social dispute .

[Slide 21] There is ongoing disagreement about the reality of climate change. We cannot justify incivility with climate change deniers by saying we’re “preserving an important public consensus” or “defending shared values” There is no broad public consensus on this issue. For better or worse, it remains controversial.

[Slide 22] There is ongoing disagreement about universal healthcare.

[Slide 23] There is ongoing disagreement about the ethics of abortion. These are the sorts of issues about which people are typically uncivil. But we cannot justify this incivility by pointing to universal values.

[Slide 24] In cases of ongoing social dispute there’s no public consensus to defend. Thus, we can’t say, “ I’m justified in disrespecting the Pro-Choicer b/c we all agree her views are unreasonable and unacceptable .” So… Can we make sense of / justify righteous incivility in these cases? Likewise, we cannot justify incivility with climate change deniers by saying we’re “preserving an important public consensus” or “defending shared values” There is no broad public consensus on this issue. For better or worse, it remains controversial.

[Slide 25] Amy Olberding In principle, Yes ; in practice, No. There are cases of righteous incivility about matters of ongoing social dispute , but we cannot trust ourselves to know when those cases arise. Here’s Olberding’s thesis

[Slide 26] Here’s a plausible case. In the early 1910’s the women’s suffrage movement in the UK was getting desperate as years of political activism had yet to secure them the vote. They resorted to incivility: to verbal aggression, heckling, rudeness, and physical violence (like physical confrontations with police and window smashing.) Their worry was that precisely because women had historically been well-behaved – had been polite, well-mannered, and civil – men had no trouble dismissing their demands. Women were meek; their complaints were easily dismissed.

[Slide 27] “ Men got the vote because they were [willing to be] violent. Women did not get it because they were constitutional and law-abiding… The 20th century women began to say to themselves, ‘Is it not time, since our methods have failed and the men’s have succeeded, that we should take a leaf out of their political book?’... [We] have tried all other available means and have failed to secure justice… I tell you that in Great Britain there is no other way. ” – Emiline Pankhurst, suffragette Since being civil was part of why they still didn’t have the vote, it would seem absurd to demand that they remain respectful. That would be to demand, in effect, that they resign themselves to many more years of being treated like 2nd class citizens – like pseudo-property.

[Slide 28] Although women’s suffrage was, at the time, a matter of ongoing social dispute , the suffragettes were plausibly justified . Theirs was a righteous incivility .

[Slide 29] Can we ever be righteously uncivil in cases of ongoing social dispute ? Apparently, Yes. There are cases like this.

[Slide 30] “ My doubts about righteous incivility are not about whether it’s sometimes best but about how to tell when that would be so.” – Amy Olberding But, again, Olberding’s concern is that we are not good at telling when OUR SITUATION is one of those that calls for righteous incivility.

[Slide 31] The asymmetry argument Recall, earlier I pointed out that one reason we should in general be civil is that we ourselves expect others to be civil toward us. By symmetry, if I can demand respect from you, then surely you can demand respect from me. However, I think most people who behave uncivilly think that they are justified in doing so precisely because there is no real symmetry between themselves and their political opponents.

[Slide 32] Observation Most people think there’s an asymmetry between themselves & their opponents. “My opponents sometimes need to be called out, roughed up, treated with contempt. As for me and mine, we’re doing our best. We are owed respect.” We could put the point like this.

[Slide 33] There are basically two possible principles that might justify this asymmetry and, thus, righteous incivility in cases of ongoing social disagreement : Option 1 – Righteous-in-Fact Incivility is justified when I actually am fighting for a righteous cause and when the people I would be uncivil toward actually do have false beliefs. Option 2 – Righteous-in-Feeling Incivility is morally justified when I feel very confident both that I am fighting for a righteous cause and that those I would be uncivil toward are in the wrong. The basic thought is, What could possibly ground the asymmetry? Why would it be true that YOU owe ME respect, but I don’t owe YOU respect? There are only really two options. Option #1 YOU owe ME respect because i am actually right. I don’t owe YOU respect because you’re are actually wrong Option #2 YOU owe ME respect because your view is weak and you don’t believe it very strongly. I don’t owe YOU respect because I am very confident in my view, because I am sure that I am right.

[Slide 34] Option 1 – Righteous-in-Fact Incivility is justified when I actually am fighting for a righteous cause and when the people I would be uncivil toward actually do have false beliefs. Quiz Our question is this: When should I think myself justified in being uncivil to my political opponents? QUIZ Q: Hopefully you can already sort of make out why Righteous-in-Fact an unsatisfying answer to that question. Take a shot at it: Why doesn’t this work?

[Slide 35] Imagine a man who disagrees with you about, basically, everything – about all matters of ongoing social dispute. (e.g. abortion, policing, the existence of God, the death penalty, universal healthcare, etc.) And, let’s suppose, on each issue, he is exactly as confident as you are. (e.g. if you are 98% sure that you have the correct view about abortion, he is 98% sure that he has the correct view.) Now imagine that he’s persistently really shitty to you online – mocking you, harrassing you, telling you he hopes you die, threatening you. You message him like,...

[Slide 36] The trouble with Righteous-in-Fact is that we can’t tell merely by inspection which of our beliefs are the actually true ones. In cases of ongoing social disagreement , many people on both sides will feel sure that their side is the actually right one. But, of course, one side is actually wrong ! Our false beliefs feel exactly the same as our true beliefs! My true beliefs don’t, like, sparkle with some inner worthiness that is clearly absent from my false beliefs. No. My true beliefs and my false beliefs FEEL THE SAME TO ME. (Notice, if false beliefs felt different from true beliefs, You would have already rejected all your false beliefs on the grounds that they have that distinctive false belief feel to them. (But there is no such feeling, is my point.)) Thus, Righteous in Fact is unhelpful. I can’t tell which causes are the actually righteous ones! So I cannot use this principle to make decisions. It’s unhelpful.

[Slide 37] And that means, Righteous-in-Fact either, (a) tells us we’re never justified in incivility (b/c we can never be sure we’re actually right ) (b) or collapses into Righteous-in-Feeling. (b/c being confident is all you need.) We can put the point this way, Righteous-in-Fact tells us that we are righteously uncivil when we our beliefs are actually true. Since I can’t tell which of my beliefs are the actually true ones, this means we really only have two options in how we interpret the Righteous-in-Fact principle: Either it tells us we’re never justified Or, it tells us we’re justified whenever we feel confident. If we’re never justified, then Righteous-in-Fact cannot explain the asymmetry. If you and me are both never justified in being righteously uncivil, then you and me are symmetric when it comes to owing each other respect. On the other hand, if Righteous-in-Fact is interpreted as saying that we are justified whenever we think we are actually correct, then it just collapses into the other option: Righteous-in-Feeling.

[Slide 38] There are basically two possible principles that might justify this asymmetry and, thus, righteous incivility in cases of ongoing social disagreement : Option 1 – Righteous-in-Fact Incivility is justified when I actually am fighting for a righteous cause and when the people I would be uncivil toward actually do have false beliefs. Option 2 – Righteous-in-Feeling Incivility is morally justified when I feel very confident both that I am fighting for a righteous cause and that those I would be uncivil toward are in the wrong. So, Not Option 1, apparently. What about Option 2?

[Slide 39] There are basically two possible principles that might justify righteous incivility in cases of ongoing social disagreement : Option 1 – Righteous-in-Fact Incivility is justified when I am actually am fighting for a righteous cause and when the people I would be uncivil toward actually do have false beliefs. Option 2 – Righteous-in-Feeling Incivility is morally justified when I feel very confident both that I am fighting for a righteous cause and that those I would be uncivil toward are in the wrong. Quiz QUIZ Q: As before, hopefully you can already sort of make out why Righteous-in-Feeling is also an unsatisfying answer to that question. Take a shot at it: Why doesn’t this work? The basic idea is: This principle also cannot explain the asymmetry. And that’s because my political opponents and I are equally confident about our opposing positions. Since we are symmetric in our confidence, we are, according to this principle, symmetric in our permissions to be righteously uncivil.

[Slide 40] Again, imagine a confrontation the man who’s harrassing you online… THIS IS NOT HOW THIS CONVERSATION WOULD END But there’s another very serious problem with Righteous-in-Feeling, and that is that almost no one actually likes this view. Almost no one thinks “I feel very confident” is a legitimate reason for being rude and uncivil. When someone is being uncivil toward me, I do not care whether or not they feel confident that I deserve to be treated rudely, without respect. That’s irrelevant. I think they owe me respect. Period. Since I clearly don’t think that feeling confident is a sufficient reason for others to be uncivil, I should not think it a sufficient reason for me to be uncivil.

[Slide 41] There are basically two possible principles that might justify this asymmetry and, thus, righteous incivility in cases of ongoing social disagreement : Option 1 – Righteous-in-Fact Incivility is justified when I am actually am fighting for a righteous cause and when the people I would be uncivil toward actually do have false beliefs. Option 2 – Righteous-in-Feeling Incivility is morally justified when I feel very confident both that I am fighting for a righteous cause and that those I would be uncivil toward are in the wrong. Thus, it doesn’t look like we can defend the asymmetry.

[Slide 42] Observation Most people think there’s an asymmetry between themselves & their opponents. “My opponents sometimes need to be called out, roughed up, treated with contempt. As for me and mine, we’re doing our best. We are owed respect.” If we can’t justify this asymmetry, righteous incivility must be symmetric. If my incivility is sometimes righteous , so too must my opponents’ be. To argument concludes, BUT I think I am owed respect, toleration, and consideration from my opponents – pretty much alwaysand without exception My situation is symmetric to my opponents’ situation. Thus, they must be owed respect, toleration, and consideration from me.

[Slide 43] It’s righteous incivility to be uncivil with a defender of pedophilia. To push the point home, Notice, we don’t have the same problem when it comes to defending righteous incivility against, say, a defender of pedophilia. There really is an asymmetry here! Almost everyone agrees with me that pedophilia is morally wicked; almost no one agrees with my opponent that pedophilia is morally unobjectionable. That’s a real difference! And it’s an important difference!

[Slide 44] The argument for self-doubt

[Slide 45] Observation Our motivations for (and feelings about) being uncivil often don’t look like the motivations and feelings of a truly virtuous moral agent. We could put the point like this.

[Slide 46] “ Truly righteous incivility would issue from a deeply moral wish against its own necessity. It would come about as forced, a sorry step one feels reluctantly obliged to take. Morally good people want to respect others – they want a world in which we can, in all good conscience and effect, treat each other humanely and kindly. They do not want to signal disrespect even when they see they must. They are people who perceive a moral need to be rough and inconsiderate as distressing.” – Amy Olberding

[Slide 47] P1) If my motivation for incivility were truly righteous , I would feel distressed about the prospect of being uncivil toward my opponents. P2) I do not feel distressed about being uncivil . (if anything, I rather enjoy being uncivil !) C) Thus, my motivations for incivility are not truly righteous (and, so, I’m lying to myself if I think I’m being a noble warrior for the good.) The Argument for Self-doubt

[Slide 48] So why do I want to be uncivil , then? What else could be motivating me if not my own moral rectitude and virtue ?

[Slide 49] i. Our culture glorifies the uncivil Incivility is often described in ways that sound heroic, noble, & brave. (“Speaking truth to power”; “Keeping it real”) The uncivil embody traditional values (independent, strong, courageous) The civil embody the opposite. (frail, conformist, spineless, snowflakey) What’s so great about incivility ? Olberding has some suggesetions

[Slide 50] What’s so great about incivility ? ii. It feels good to be uncivil Civility is all about restraint (and restraint feels bad!) Being brutally honest is satisfying (at least, it feels better than faking it!) Politeness is less fun than rudeness (less funny, entertaining, engaging)

[Slide 51] What’s so great about incivility ? iii. Incivility is socially rewarded Incivility gets attention & engagement People on your political team will often praise ( Like , retweet) your incivility Incivility often promotes feelings of pro-social belonging

[Slide 52] P1) If my motivation for incivility were truly righteous , I would feel distressed about the prospect of being uncivil toward my opponents. P2) I do not feel distressed about being uncivil . (if anything, I rather enjoy being uncivil !) C) Thus, my motivations for incivility are not truly righteous (and, so, I’m lying to myself if I think I’m being a noble warrior for the good.) The Argument for Self-doubt All of these facts further bolster the case for P2. It certainly looks like there are lots of bad reasons for incivility – and it’s very plausible that I am mostly interested in being uncivil because I am interested in feeling good or being liked or fitting in

[Slide 53] Amy Olberding There are cases of righteous incivility about matters of ongoing social dispute , but we cannot trust ourselves to know when those cases arise. So, again, here’s Olberding’s thesis. She’s not denying that possibility of righteous incivility. She’s questioning whether we can trust ourselves to use incivility for genuinely righteous reasons.
