# PHIL 1000 - 19 - On Legalizing Prostitution

[Slide 1] On Legalizing Prostitution A rather different ethics topic today. If you’re wondering how I’m deciding topics, I’m mostly following my nose for arguments. The argument we’re going to look today is, I think, so cool and clever.

[Slide 2] Background An argument for legalization Anderson’s reply 7 features of / regulations on personal services A world where sex work is no different Sexual Autonomy An argument for criminalization

[Slide 3] Background

[Slide 4] Some Clarifications ‘ sex work ’ and ‘ sex worker ’ have begun to replace ‘ prostitution ’ and ‘ prostitute ’ I’ll mostly use the former – in line with the WHO – but I don’t thereby mean to imply that I reject Anderson’s arguments. The aim of this change in language has been to reframe the debate as being primarily about labor relations. As we will see, whether or not such a reframing is good or desirable is precisely what is in question in Anderson’s paper. I’m going to adopt the ‘sex worker’ linguistic paradigm for the purposes of this lecture just because it’s the one used by the WHO, but I want to make it clear that this is not to imply that I favor the associated philosophical position on decriminalization.

[Slide 5] We’re only talking about sex sales among adults with some ongoing, basic freedoms. The question is, Should those transactions be legal? or (better) What’s the best way to protect the interests of those sex workers ? It’s important that it be adults because children can’t consent to sex And it’s important that we restrict ourselves to cases in which the sex workers have ongoing, basic freedoms because otherwise, their decisions to do sex work non-autonomous and likely coercive (and so, in that sense, also not consensual.) We set aside cases involving children and cases involving coercion because those are just cases of sexual assault. No reasonable person can argue that those practices ought to be legal.

[Slide 6] Everyone agrees that sex work in its current form is truly awful for sex workers Even when they’re not literally enslaved or otherwise coerced, they’re still - Stigmatized by society - Exploited / abused by clients & pimps - Denied legal recourse for mistreatment - Denied basic occupational protections (OSHA, etc.)

[Slide 7] Not in dispute We should adopt policies to alleviate the harms suffered by sex workers . Definitely in dispute Which policies will do that best.

[Slide 8] P eople disagree about how best to promote the interests of sex workers . Option 1 Legalize and normalize Option 2 Criminalize and aggressively prosecute (i.e. prosecute clients / pimps, not sex workers)

[Slide 9] Compare Everyone agrees that child enslavement is truly awful for the children . What should we do??? Option 1 Legalize and normalize Option 2 Criminalize and aggressively prosecute (the slavers, not the children) We might note: Things are really bad for enslaved children. That is not in dispute. But what policies should we adopt to improve things for those enslaved children? We seem to have the same 2 options. But in this case, it’s not really an open question which option is best.

[Slide 10] Compare Everyone agrees that medicine import laws are very bad for U.S. residents who cannot afford their essential medicines. What should we do??? Option 1 Legalize and normalize Option 2 Criminalize and aggressively prosecute (medicine importers, not patients) It is currently illegal to import prescription medicine from Canada, or other countries where the very same medicines are on sale for, often, 10% of the U.S. prince. You can get in trouble for buying that stuff. But of course, many of the people who buy imported medicine in the US are just trying to stay alive. That’s why they’re buying these illegal import drugs. So, NOT IN DISPUTE: it’s bad to be a low income person in the US with expensive medical needs. And again we seem to face two options... But in this case, as before, I don’t think it’s really an open question which option is best. (What does the opposing case even look like? How do you argue for Option 2? “It is morally better to protect drug industry profits – even though it costs the lives and livelihoods of tens of thousands of Americans per year.”)

[Slide 11] P eople disagree about how best to promote the interests of sex workers . Option 1 Legalize and normalize Option 2 Criminalize and aggressively prosecute (i.e. prosecute clients / pimps, not sex workers) Quiz Unlike the last two cases, it really does seem to be an open question which of these two options is best. At least, among philosophers and ethicists, among the people whose literal job it is to think about these things, there is lively debate between these two options. Which option we should adopt depends on whether we think we can best reduce the harms suffered by sex workers by trying to eliminate prostitution or by creating a less-stigmatized, more-protected version of the profession. QUIZ: Temperature check: Which direction are you leaning right now? Do favor option 1 or option 2?

[Slide 12] An argument for legalization Anderson’s main goal is to reject or undermine a very powerful argument for legalizing sex work – the argument that is, probably, the best and most persuasive for the legalize position.

[Slide 13] P1) It is good and appropriate for personal service professions to be legal and normal parts of society. (e.g. driving, tutoring, massaging, hair cutting, graphic design) An Argument for Legalize/Normalize

[Slide 14] On P1) it is good and appropriate for hair cutting to be a normal, legal profession. A barber paid to use his/her hands to other people’s bodies, to cut and shape their hair – a personal service

[Slide 15] On P1: It is good and appropriate for massage therapy to be a normal, legal profession. A massage therapist gets paid to use her hands, her body on other people in ways they find pleasing and relaxing – a personal service

[Slide 16] On P1) it is good and appropriate for driving to be a normal, legal profession. A driver uses his/her hands to operation a machine, ferrying other people to the places they need to go – a personal service

[Slide 17] P1) It is good and appropriate for personal service professions to be legal and normal parts of society. (e.g. driving, tutoring, massaging, hair cutting, graphic design) P2) Sex work is just like other personal service professions – but with a strong social stigma An Argument for Legalize/Normalize

[Slide 18] On P2: You might plausibly think: In the same way that a driver or massage therapist uses their body to provide a personal service to others, a sex worker is using his/her body to provide a personal service to others. Sex work, you may conclude, is just another way to get paid to use your body to help others. The only REAL difference is that people are comfortable with driving an Uber for a living and uncomfortable with having sex with others for a living.

[Slide 19] P1) It is good and appropriate for personal service professions to be legal and normal parts of society. (e.g. driving, tutoring, massaging, hair cutting, graphic design) P2) Sex work is just like other personal service professions – but with a strong social stigma P3) If sex work is just like other personal service professions, the best way to protect sex workers is Option 1 (make it legal and normal) C) The best way to protect sex workers is Option 1. An Argument for Legalize/Normalize On P3) If the only difference between sex work and other personal services is that sex work makes us uncomfortable, the best way to protect sex workers is to make sex work legal and to make ourselves more comfortable with the practice.

[Slide 20] Anderson’s reply

[Slide 21] Anderson argues against P2. { P2) Sex work is just like other personal service professions – but w/ stigma Anderson’s strategy List some common and seemingly appropriate social functions/regulations on personal services . Point out that it doesn’t seem desirable for sex work to be treated in these ways. Argue that we have those intuitions because we don’t actually think sex work is like other personal services .

[Slide 22] Some important clarifications Anderson is not saying that we’d be forced to apply all these same functions and regulations to sex work , if it were legalized. (obviously, we could carve out exceptions) Anderson is not making empirical predictions about what the world would actually be like if sex work were legalized.

[Slide 23] #1 – People can make contracts to engage in personal services, and the state can enforce contracts to perform those services. Think about, e.g., a tutor. If you hire a physics tutor to help you for 20 hours of work, and they only work for 10 hours, you can sue them and the state will force to either complete their contract or pay damages

[Slide 24] #2 – Employers can make performance of personal services a condition of employment. (even if you were hired to do something else) If you work for a finance company or a marketing company or a non-profit or whatever, employers are allowed to demand that you complete personal service tasks as a condition of your employment. Your boss can say, “Hey Bob from accounting is threatening to quit if we don’t shoulder some of his transportation costs. We really need to retain Bob this year. So we promised him that you’d drive him to-and-from meetings, as needed. Refusing will, of course, result in us firing you for cause.”

[Slide 25] #3 – The state can cut off benefits to individuals who refuse to take personal service jobs, when available. Suppose you are unemployed, collecting unemployment benefits, and you get a job offer for a graphic design job or a job cutting hair. If you turn down the job offer, the state can cut off you unemployment benefits. The state will say, “Sorry. Unemployment benefits are for people who can’t find a job, not for people who can’t find the perfect job.

[Slide 26] #4 – Employers can conduct on-site monitoring to make sure employees are performing these services correctly for clients. If you have been asked to drive clients around during a conference, your employer can put a camera in the car or send another employee along with to make sure you’re driving safely, and doing a good job.

[Slide 27] #5 – Services providers are required by law to conduct their business in accordance with non-discrimination statutes. Employees can be fired for refusing to take on a particular client, for whatever reason. If you’re a massage therapist, you can’t simply refuse to work with white people or veterans or Muslims or whatever. That’s illegal discrimination! Similarly, if your boss has asked you to do graphic design work for clients, you can be fired-for-cause if you refuse to do graphic designs for women or Republicans or whatever.

[Slide 28] #6 – Employers can monitor employees off-site to ensure they are not jeopardizing their ability to perform these services. If your employer has asked you to do some driving for clients, your employer can drug test you and do other sorts of off-site monitoring to make sure you’re fit to perform your driving duties.

[Slide 29] #7 – Children are aware of personal services as possible career paths and, in fact, may be counseled to pursue those careers, if they show special aptitude. Probably many of you took occupational profiles in high school. Very regularly, high school counselors advise their students to pursue those careers that they show aptitude for – and they offer them helpful advice for securing jobs in that industry. This includes personal service jobs like graphic design, teaching, hair-dressing.

[Slide 30] Now imagine what it would be like if sex work were treated just like any other personal service .

[Slide 31] #1 – People can make contracts to engage in sex work , and the state can enforce contracts to perform those services. If A hires B for sex services and B decides she actually doesn’t want to have sex with A, A can sue B and the state will step in, telling B: Either finish out your contract with A or pay for damages

[Slide 32] #2 – Employers can make performance of sex work a condition of employment. (even if you were hired to do something else) If you work for a finance company or a marketing company or a non-profit or whatever, your employer can come to you and say, “Hey, as part of our retention package for Bob in accounting – he’s thinking about leaving the company – we promised him that you’d have sex with him once a day over his lunch break. If you refuse, we will fire you with cause.”

[Slide 33] #3 – The state can cut off benefits to individuals who refuse to take sex work jobs. Suppose you are unemployed, collecting unemployment benefits, and you get a job offer for sex work If you turn down the job offer, the state can cut off you unemployment benefits. The state will say, “Sorry. Unemployment benefits are for people who can’t find a job, not for people who can’t find the perfect job.

[Slide 34] #4 – Employers can conduct on-site monitoring to make sure employees are performing sex work services correctly for clients. If you have been asked to have sex with clients during a conference, your employer can put a camera in the room or send another employee along with to make sure you’re practicing safe sex and doing a good job.

[Slide 35] #5 – Sex workers are required by law to conduct their business in accordance with non-discrimination statutes. Employees can be fired for refusing to take on a particular client, for whatever reason. If your boss has asked you to do sex work for clients, you can be fired-for-cause if you refuse to have sex with men or Republicans or whatever

[Slide 36] #6 – Employers can monitor employees off-site to ensure they are not jeopardizing their ability to perform sex work . If your employer has asked you to do some sex work for clients, your employer can STI test you regularly to make sure you are able to perform your duties

[Slide 37] #7 – Children are aware that sex work is a possible career path and, in fact, may be counseled to pursue sex work , if they show special aptitude.

[Slide 38] Some important clarifications Anderson is not saying that we’d be forced to apply all these same functions and regulations to sex work , if it were legalized. (obviously, we could carve out exceptions) Anderson is not making empirical predictions about what the world would actually be like if sex work were legalized. Let me reiterate.

[Slide 39] Anderson is saying, That most of us recoil from this hypothetical world, reveals that we don’t actually think sex work is just like other personal services .

[Slide 40] P1) It is good and appropriate for personal service professions to be legal and normal parts of society. (e.g. driving, tutoring, massaging, hair cutting, graphic design) P2) Sex work is just like other personal service professions – but with a strong social stigma P3) If sex work is just like other personal service professions, the best way to protect sex workers is Option 1 (make it legal and normal) C) The best way to protect sex workers is Option 1. A Powerful Argument for Legalize/Normalize This is Anderson’s reply. He’s argued P2 is false. Most of us DO NOT ACTUALLY THINK that sex work is just like other personal services.

[Slide 41] Sexual Autonomy

[Slide 42] If sex work isn’t just like other personal services , what’s the difference? Quiz QUIZ: What do you think the difference is? Why do we recoil from a world where sex work is treated just like other personal services?

[Slide 43] Anderson thinks, The difference is that we, as a society, place a very high value on sexual autonomy – i.e. the freedom to determine the frequency, timing, and manner of one’s sexual encounters. Relative to other personal services, sex work sacrifices something of great value. If sex work isn’t just like other personal services , what’s the difference? Obviously, if you are a sex worker, you no longer have full freedom to determine the frequency, timing, and manner of one’s sexual encounters – especailly not if you work for someone else. Sex workers surrender their sexual autonomy. No other workers have to do that. (A driver may give up his driving autonomy – his freedom to decide when and where to drive – but we dont’ really care about our own personal driving autonomy. That’s not a valuable thing we want to protect.)

[Slide 44] #2 – Employers can make performance of sex work a condition of employment. (even if you were hired to do something else) Anderson thinks, When you recoil from a world where your boss can fire you for not having sex everyday with Bob from accounting, you are recoiling from a world where you don’t have sexual autonomy.

[Slide 45] P eople disagree about how best to promote the interests of sex workers . Option 1 Legalize and normalize Option 2 Criminalize and aggressively prosecute (i.e. prosecute clients / pimps, not sex workers) If he’s right about that, then he’s in a position to give a plausible argument for Option 2.

[Slide 46] P1) If we go with Option 1 , it would disproportionately be the poor (and mostly women/minorities) who give up their sexual autonomy . P2) For most people, giving up their sexual autonomy would constitute a serious burden and loss. P3) A policy that imposes a serious burden disproportionately on minorities/women/the poor is presumptively unjust . C) Option 1 (legalize/normalize) is presumptively unjust . An argument for criminalize/prosecute
