# PHIL 3600 - 06 - Objections to the Fine-tuning Argument

[Slide 1] Objections to the Fine-tuning Argument

[Slide 2] Review of the Fine tuning Argument Three Objections The God-of-the-gaps Objection + A Reply The Anthropic Principle Objection + A Reply The Multiverse Objection + A Reply

[Slide 3] Recall: the universe was compared to a pocketwatch – something intricate and delicate that almost certainly wouldn’t come to be by natural accident.

[Slide 4] P1) Fine tuning : The laws of the universe could have been a little different, and if they had been, the universe would be uninhabitable P2) Evidence Principle : Take two competing hypotheses, H 1 and H 2 . An observation, O, is strong evidence for H 1 when O is far more likely under H 1 than under H 2 (i.e. when O is far more likely in an H 1 -world than an H 2 -world) P3) Fine-tuning is far more likely under H 1 (H 1 = God exists) than under H 2 (H 2 = God does not exist) C) So, fine-tuning is strong evidence for the existence of God. The Fine-tuning Argument And here’s the full argument. P1 is an observation from physics. P2 tells us how we should assess observations as evidence P3 tells us how this observation compares, given two different hypotheses – that God exists or doesn’t.

[Slide 5] The “God of the Gaps” Objection

[Slide 6] You can’t explain that. Here’s an example of a particular kind of theistic argument to get us started.

[Slide 7] This clip is *funny* – and was widely mocked – because the central claim that scientists can’t explain the tides is on its face: very silly. Super silly. (hence the Neil deGrasse Tyson tweet) This clip is *significant* because it’s part of a more general pattern of argument/objection that we can see recurring throughout history: a theist claims, You can’t explain this feature of the world. Therefore God. Then some scientists come along, “Well actually, we can explain that…”

[Slide 8] Early Christian Theists “Why do the planets move about the sky? You can’t explain that! Therefore God.”

[Slide 9] Isaac Newton *chuckles* “Well actually …”

[Slide 10] Isaac Newton “But where did the planets all come from? You can’t explain that! Therefore God.”

[Slide 11] Simon Laplace *chuckles* “Well actually …”

[Slide 12] These are sometimes called, “ god of the gaps ” arguments. The problem is that they collapse as soon as science fills in the gap.

[Slide 13] “ [It’s a mistake] to use God as a stop-gap for the incompleteness of our knowledge. [For, as] the frontiers of knowledge are being pushed further and further back… God is being pushed back with them, and is therefore continually in retreat. We are to find God in what we know, not in what we don't know. ” – Dietrich Bonhoeffer, German theologian Hopefully you can see why this sort of theistic argument is bad news. Here’s a nice quote from the german theologian Bonhoeffer that captures the problem.

[Slide 14] One objection to the Fine-tuning Argument , then, is that it’s just another god of the gaps argument.

[Slide 15] Modern Theists “Fragile universe? You can’t explain that! Therefore God.” So this is

[Slide 16] Future Scientists *chuckles* “Well actually …”

[Slide 17] The God of the Gaps Objection We don’t need to take the Fine-tuning Argument seriously b/c it’s just another God of the Gaps argument. Reply – Science probably won’t fill in this gap. … But, in this case, the theist has a ready reply.

[Slide 18] ATHEIST: “While we can’t yet explain the universe’s fine tuning, I’m willing to bet we’ll eventually find a General Law of Universal Structure that explains why the universe had to be this way. THEIST: “Yeah, ok, but can’t we just ask the same question about the General Law ? Why that law? Couldn’t it have been different? Is it not finely tuned?” ATHEIST: “Well – and I’m speculating here – maybe there’s some General, General Law that forced the General Law to be like that? THEIST: “But that just raises the very same questions: Why that law? Couldn’t it have been different? Is it not finely tuned? And don’t try to posit another law; I’ll just ask the same questions.” Maybe the best way to get the idea across is by imagining the dialectic as a conversation between a theist and an atheist. In short, the theist isn’t worried that the Fine-tuning Argument is a god of the gaps objection b/c it seems like there’s a permanent explanatory hole here. Even if the fine-tuning can be explained by some General Law, the hole will remain. And if that General Law can be explained by yet another law, the hole will remain. The hole is the need to explain why the laws of universe (whether the Finely tuned ones or the higher-order laws that explain the fine-tuning) are the way that they are.

[Slide 19] The Anthropic Principle Objection

[Slide 20] It’s THE FUTURE. 100 years ago, the Earth underwent a nuclear annihilation event, and now Cleveland is the only place fit for human habitation. (Literally, leaving Cleveland will kill you in seconds.) This is all common knowledge You wake up one day with no recollection of your past or present situation except that there was a bad accident. Whoa! How are you still alive? You reason, Either I got lucky or God is personally protecting me!

[Slide 21] You wake up from a coma. Whoa, how are you still alive? H1: God protected you ! H2: You got lucky. Framing the case as we did last time, we can state our two hypotheses like this:

[Slide 22] Observation: You’re in Cleveland! The only safe place. H2: You got lucky. Quiz H1: God protected you ! You ask someone where you are, and they tell you that you’re in Cleveland. You think: “Wow! 99.99…% of the earth is uninhabitable. Basically, nowhere is safe. But here I am! In Cleveland! The only safe place. What are the chances?! Surely they’re unimaginably small. And that demands explanation. The only plausible explanation is that God exists and is personally protecting me.” This is a example of bad reasoning. Why?

[Slide 23] Given that you’re alive, what are the chances you’d find alive yourself in Cleveland? If H1 is true? If H2 is true? If H1 is true, if God scooped you up to save you, where can She put you down? Only in Cleveland. So if God’s protected you, you’re basically guaranteed to find yourself in Cleveland. That’s the only place God can put you. Thus, If God is protecting you, the chances you’d find yourself in Cleveland, given that you’re alive, is basically 100%. If H2 is true, though, if God is not protecting you, then again, there’s only one place where you can be alive: Cleveland. All living people are in Cleveland. Thus, the chances that you’d find yourself in Cleveland, given that you’re alive, is also basically 100% if God isn’t protecting you. So the observation that you’re in Cleveland isn’t evidence for either hypothesis. Since all living beings are in Cleveland and since you exist, you are in Cleveland. So you don’t learn anything new when you learn that you are in Cleveland, and you certainly don’t get important evidence that God is watching out for you.

[Slide 24] Being in a fine-tuned universe is like discovering that you’re in Cleveland. Since only Cleveland supports life, all observers are in Cleveland. Since only fine-tuned universes support life, all observers are in fine-tuned universes. The Anthropic Principle Objection This is known as the anthropic principle: Since all possible observers exist in life-supporting universes, all possible observers will observe that they live in a life-supporting universe. WHOA MAN! CRAZY COINCIDENCE, RIGHT?

[Slide 25] What are the chances that we’d find ourselves in a finely-tuned universe? 100%! The fine-tuning of the universe is not evidence that God exists It has to be fine-tuned. (since we’re alive in it!) The Anthropic Principle Objection The Fine-tuner asks:... This objection replies:... The Anthropic Principle Objection simply says, noticing that you’re in a life-supporting universe is like noticing you’re alive in Cleveland. It’s not evidence. It’s a logical entailment of the fact that you’re alive.

[Slide 26] Reply – This Objection misstates our evidence. The Anthropic Principle Objection Does this objection succeed? Well in this case, the proponent of the Fine-tuning Arg has a very plausible rejoinder. And that is that the AnthropicPrinc Obj mistates our evidence

[Slide 27] What’s our evidence? The universe we’re in supports life. OR There is a universe that supports life. Quiz The Anthropic Principle Objection The problem with the Anthropic Principle Objection is that it’s done a sneaky little bait-n-switch. We have to very careful about restating what exactly is being claimed by the original Fine-tuning Argument. QUIZ: Which of these is the evidence that the proponent of the Fine-tuning argument is trying to point to?

[Slide 28] This isn’t surprising. This is. The Anthropic Principle Objection What’s our evidence? The universe we’re in supports life. OR There is a universe that supports life. The first claim isnt surprising. OF COURSE, the universe that we’re in supports life. We’re in it! We are life! Thus, our universe must support us. But that’s not the claim at issue. The second claim is the one that’s at issue in the Fine-tuning argument – and that seems genuinely surprising in a universe that happened by accident. What’s crazy is that there is any life at all – when there might very easily have been none. Given that there’s a universe that supports life, we would of course find ourselves there. But it’s still surprinsg that there’s a universe like that.

[Slide 29] The Multiverse Objection

[Slide 30] We live in a universe. Could there be others? With different laws?

[Slide 31] We live in a universe. Could there be others? With different laws? Maybe the universe works like this… ANd maybe each time the universe is reborn with a big bang, there are different physical laws and constants.

[Slide 32] We live in a universe. Could there be others? With different laws? Maybe there’s a multiverse like this… ANd maybe each individual universe in the multiverse has its own set of physical laws and constants. If so, each there are a bajillion diff universes, each with its own set of physical laws and constants, then it is really not surprising that one of them supports life. (and, then, of course, not surprising that we’d find ourselves in the life-supporting one.) That’s the Multiverse Objection: if we live in a multiverse, the fine-tuning of our own universe is not evidence for God.

[Slide 33] To get at the objection, it may help to consider an analogy case: Imagine you have the ability to teleport. It works like this: you snap your fingers and disappear, instantly reappearing somewhere else. But, suppose, you’re not very good at it. You basically reappear at a random location in a 500 mile radius. It’s not a reliable travel method. Now suppose you snap your fingers and reappear at home, ON THE VERY FIRST TRY, that would be pretty weird, right? You could have wound up in any random location in a 500 mile radius, but you ended up at home? Crazy. But what if you appeared at home after a solid year of trying? (everyday, *snap* nope *snap* nope *snap* nope.) That surely wouldn’t be weird. When you finally arrived in your bedroom, you would think Finally! And not WHOA, how did that happen?

[Slide 34] Suppose we live in a multiverse where each universe has different constants. Is it surprising that one supports life? That depends on how many there are! The Multiverse Objection With a bajillion universes, there’s a bajillion chances to get things just right. SO if there are lots of universes each with different physical law and constants, then its not surprising that one of them supports life. And it’s not surprising that we live in that universe. That’s like finding yourself teleported back home after a year of failed attempts.

[Slide 35] The Fine-tuning Argument only works if we assume there’s one universe. But there might be bajillions. So, the Fine-tuning Argument fails. The Multiverse Objection

[Slide 36] Reply – This is pure speculation . At best, it shows that our evidence supports 2 hypotheses: God created the universe OR There’s a bajillion universes The Multiverse Objection Here is what the proponent of the fine-tuning argument is going to say in reply, though.

[Slide 37] Reply – And we can ask our original question about the multiverse itself: Why does the multiverse support life? Might it have been otherwise? The Multiverse Objection Moreover, the proponent of the fine-tuning argument is going to want to ask the original question about the multiverse itself. Suppose there is a multi-verse. Fine. Let’s imagine that’s true. We can still ask… And if there’s some sort of natural law in place about what sorts of universes can be created, then we can ask of that law, why is it like that? Couldn’t it have been otherwise?
