# PHIL 3600 - 13 - Toleration

[Slide 1] Toleration

[Slide 2] On toleration Intolerance and unacceptable costs Tolerating bad ideas Mill’s defense of toleration The Inquisitor and Lewis’ objection to Mill Lewis’ defense of toleration

[Slide 3] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? Recall this point… Today I want to talk a bit more about that third question. In particular, I want to explore some surprising philosophical complications that arise for people who are exclusivists about salvation – i.e. people who think that their own religion is the only way to be saved. That belief, it turns out, creates problems in social political philosophy concerning toleration . (as we’ll see, other non-religious beliefs also give rise to this same concern about toleration. So this should be relevant to the atheists, agnostics, and inclusivist theist among you, too.)

[Slide 4] What is toleration? The easiest way to get at it, is probably by looking a few cases – and by contrasting civility with mere toleration. Civility involves communicating in a way that signals respect and consideration . Toleration involves, simply, taking no active steps to suppress or eradicate something you dislike.

[Slide 5] You and an acquaintance are having a serious conversation when they say something you find offensive. You try to understand their point of view, but end up telling them you think they’re making a serious error. This is civil AND tolerant.

[Slide 6] You and an acquaintance are having a serious conversation when they say something you find offensive. You don’t think they can be reasoned with, so you give ‘em a “Fuck You” and excuse yourself from the conversation. This is uncivil but still basically tolerant.

[Slide 7] You and an acquaintance are having a serious conversation when they say something you find offensive. To stop them from ever saying something like that again, you pull out a pistol and threaten to gun violence them. This is uncivil AND intolerant.

[Slide 8] Tolerance is a particular kind of attitude toward something you think is bad . (after all, we don’t tolerate pizza; we relish it.) Toleration is like Diet Civility – not full-on respect, but at least a willingness to let the bad thing continue on unimpeded. Toleration is, basically, non-interference.

[Slide 9] The relevant opposite is intolerance . To be intolerant of a bad thing is to take active steps to suppress or eradicate it. By default, we are (and should be!) intolerant of bad things.

[Slide 10] We didn’t tolerate COVID. We immediately tried to suppress & eradicate it. We didn’t just shrug and say, “I guess this is our reality now” when COVID showed up. We immediately set about making vaccines to eliminate it.

[Slide 11] We shouldn’t tolerate poverty. We should try to suppress and eradicate it.

[Slide 12] We are (correctly!) intolerant of crime, of cancer, of car crashes We have laws and policies and institutions aimed at eradicating and suppressing these bad things. We don’t simply agree to disagree with cancer or murder or traffic fatalities. We set about trying to stop them.

[Slide 13] By default, we are (and should be!) intolerant of bad things. Toleration , in contrast, is the appropriate response only when the costs of suppression or eradication are too high. EX | taxes mosquitos noisy neighbors seasonal influenza deaths (i) To eradicate taxes would be to leave ourselves with no government – and thus, none of the good things govts can give us (organizing, leading, defending, protecting, providing, conflict arbitrating, etc) (ii) Maybe someday we’ll be able to eradicate mosquitos but we’re not there yet. Any attempts would be overwhelming costly and overwhelmingly likely to fail. (To say nothing of the possible ecological catastrophes that might result) (iii) Nobody likes hearing their neighbors stomp around at 4am – and we might sometimes take steps to get them to stop – but permanent solutions are out of reach, at least until you can afford your own home. It’s too expensive to make all the wall in your apt building thicker OR to simply rent out all the apartments around yours so that you don’t have any neighbors (iv) We could have gone into lockdown every winter to save 10s of thousands of lives but we haven’t been doing that because we don’t judge the costs to be worth the gains.

[Slide 14] N.B. Toleration is not an all-or-nothing thing.

[Slide 15] Do we tolerate the North Korean regime? Sort of yes, sort of no. We do take some active steps to suppress and eliminate the oppressive North Korean state. But we haven’t gone to war over it yet. In contrast, we literally did go to war in Vietnam out of an intolerance for Communism. In that sense, we might say that we only sorta tolerate mosquitos. We aren’t directing that much effort at eradicating the whole species, but you and I will certainly take steps to kill those that lands on our necks. We’ll use bug spray and citronella.

[Slide 16] N.B. Toleration is not an all-or-nothing thing. At each stage, as we step-up our efforts at suppression / eradication, we must ask, “Is this extra step worth it? Do the benefits justify the costs?”

[Slide 17] On tolerating bad ideas

[Slide 18] Most people think we should tolerate bad views and that t he active suppression of bad ideas is a barbaric relic of the past. Even those people who think we should be rude to the pro-slavery folks or the white-supremacists mostly don’t advocate illegalizing their views, putting them in jail or killing them.

[Slide 19] Consider this statue of mary dyer. Mary Dyer was hanged in Boston in 1660 for preaching Quakerism. That was after twice being ordered to cease evangelizing or leave Massachusetts, and her twice returning and continuing to preach. Mary thought it was extremely good for people to be Quakers. The colony authorities thought it was extremely bad. They thought it was so bad that they literally killed to get her to stop. Historically speaking, this is not a unusual incident. Lots of people have been jailed or killed for having views that the people in power didn’t like. Probably none of you think we should start doing that again.

[Slide 20] Most people think we should tolerate bad views and that t he active suppression of bad ideas is a barbaric relic of the past. Quiz That most people aren’t down with that kind of intolerance these days is actually pretty interesting! Given that we are, by default, intolerant of bad things, the fact that basically everyone today is in favor of toleration when it comes to bad views suggests something important. What does that suggest? Something like: everyone agrees that the costs of suppressing / eradicating bad views is ASTRONOMICALLY HIGH – so high that no view is ever bad enough to justify suppression. Again, that’s interesting!

[Slide 21] Given this near-universal agreement, we might expect it to be easy to give a satisfying defense of toleration . Surely, we could just list all the terrible costs of intolerance , and it’d be obvious that tolerance is always better .

[Slide 22] So, what are some reasons to be tolerant , from a truth-neutral perspective? (Not looking for full-fledged arguments, here – just considerations in favor of tolerance.) Quiz Here by “truth-neutral”, I mean that we’re looking for reasons that everyone can appreciate – as opposed to reasons that are only moving if you have certain political or religious or philosophical beliefs. So, for example, “One reason to be tolerant is that the Pope says tolerance is good.” is not a truth-neutral reason. Non-Catholics mostly won’t care about that. On the other hand, basically everyone thinks killing is bad so it would count as a truth-neutral reason to point out that “Effective intolerance may sometimes require us to kill people.” You don’t have to belong to any particular ideological group to care about that. So: what are some truth-neutral reasons to like tolerance – some reasons that we can mostly all agree on? Think about that for a second; try to come up with a few.

[Slide 23] What is probably the best known defense of toleration comes from John Stuart Mill (1806 - 1873). Mill’s version is the one you all probably heard in your civics or government classes in high school. Mill wants to give us a Neutralist Tally of all the great benefits of toleration, a list that will be acceptable to all people, regardless of their religious creed or political party. Mill’s idea is basically this, Let me list off to you all the great things we get from being tolerant. And since I’m trying to argue on behalf of society at large, I’ll restrict my list to only those benefits that we can all appreciate and enjoy – nothing controversial! Christians and atheists alike can agree on this list; Republicans and Democrats both. Then he argues that that list, when added together, clearly shows that the cost of intolerance is too high – that it’s best for society if we tolerate bad ideas.

[Slide 24] Mill’s list of reasons for toleration Here’s Mill’s list of reasons to be tolerant

[Slide 25] Risk of error One risk of intolerance is that we might mess up and suppress the truth on accident. That would be bad.

[Slide 26] Mixture Another risk is that we might suppress a partially true/partially false view. Truth and error may be found combined in one package deal, so that there's no way of suppressing the error without also suppressing the truth So for example, if you suppress Marx’s books because you think communism is false and dangerous, you also risk suppressing the parts of Marx where he says other stuff that might be true and interesting and important

[Slide 27] Dead dogma Another reason to like tolerance is that it forces us to debate and argue over which views are true. And one important reason that debate and argument are good is that they help us develop and deepen our understanding of our own positions. By being challenged, we are forced to think a little more carefully about why we believe what we believe. So Mill worries: If we suppress all the bad views, future generations may have true beliefs but without actually understanding why those beliefs are true. Having never had to defend their positions, they will have dead dogmas – true beliefs that are poorly understood and held for shallow reasons. Since it’s important both to have true beliefs and to understand them, we should be wary of suppressing all opposition to our own views. Opposition is good for us!

[Slide 28] Critical thinking Likewise, you might think that active debate helps instill critical thinking skills in citizens. And surely the state does better when it’s citizens are wise and good at thinking. A state that suppresses all false views – and, thus, suppresses lots of substantive debates – may be a state whose citizens have really poor critical thinking skills

[Slide 29] Diversity & individuality One might also think it’s simply a good thing to have a diversity of opinions. Or, put differently, that it’s bad for everyone to conform to the same narrow template, to be a cookie-cutter copy of everyone else. If mere diversity is good then intolerance is bad because it limits diversity

[Slide 30] State surveillance Another worry is that truly effective suppression is going to require some pretty invasive state surveillance. Like, how can we be sure the communists – or whomever– aren’t secretly holding meeting? Well we’re going to have to watch everyone all the time That’s a bad thing! That’s a serious cost to effective intolerance. Thus, another reason to favor tolerance

[Slide 31] Suffering of dissidents Last – but not at all least – the people who hold the views we are trying to suppress will suffer. (Maybe because they won’t be allowed to speak their mind; maybe because we’ll throw them in jail; maybe because we will kill them) Suffering is bad. We should want to prevent suffering whenever we can. The fact that intolerance requires some people to suffer is a really good reason to favor tolerance.

[Slide 32] Mill argues, taken together, these reasons clearly tell in favor of toleration . It’s best for everyone if we argue with the bad views rather than suppress/eradicate them, for surely the good views will triumph in the end. ... Mill’s position is basically the “marketplace of ideas” defense of toleration – though that particular phrase, the “marketplace of ideas” wasn’t coined until a century later.

[Slide 33] The Inquisitor & the case for intolerance This is all set-up for the main argument in the Lewis paper. Lewis’ main point is that this traditional defense is clearly inadequate. If toleration truly is justified, this cannot be the reason why. His strategy is to show that Mill’s list of benefits cannot stack up against the kinds of bad things that we may allow by being tolerant of bad views.

[Slide 34] “Imagine the Inquisitor : a thoughtful Christian, benevolent by his own lights. He claims no infallibility. Indeed his faith is infirm, and he is vividly aware that he just might be making a tragic mistake. He grants every item in [Mill’s list.] His only complaint is that the tally is incomplete. He believes, in fact, that the included items have negligible weight compared to the omitted item: heresy . The consequence [of which] is eternal damnation.]” -David Lewis He starts with an easy case.

[Slide 35] The Inquisitor is an exclusivist about salvation. He’s not cruel nor dogmatic nor self-righteous, but he does earnestly believe that heretics will suffer in hell forever. Since he wants what’s best for everyone, he is (understandably!) very concerned about heresy.

[Slide 36] Lewis argues, To the Inquisitor – who believes heretics burn forever in hell – Mill’s defense of toleration is laughably inadequate. Why? Why is the Inquisitor unmoved by Mill’s list? Quiz

[Slide 37] For the Inquisitor, the cost of toleration is unacceptably high. Benevolent and well-meaning, it is clear to him that the best thing to do is stamp out heresy . Basically, Lewis’ point is this:... By tolerating the heretic, he risks the spread of heresy – and the eternal damnation of yet more souls. Compared to those stakes, the costs of intolerance are insignificant. EVEN IF he can never convince the heretics to change their ways so long as he is able to prevent even one person from believing the heresy, that’ll pay for everything. One soul saved from hell is worth indefinitely many people thrown in jail or executed. So. That’s not great. Here’s an example of a person who does not agree that we should be tolerant of other people’s views . Kinda concerning!

[Slide 38] Well, so what? So what if one hypothetical man has a problem with toleration? Can’t we simply ignore this fringe extremist – and those like him? Can’t the rest of all agree that toleration is clearly the better option? But maybe you’re thinking something like this.

[Slide 39] For starters, 58% of Americans do believe in hell, and many do believe that people can be damned for having the wrong beliefs. First of all: that’s actually just not true, that basically no one has the same views as the Inquisitor... I couldn’t find any good statistics on what Americans think is required for avoiding hell, but the point remains: most people around here think that hell is a a real place and that there are souls to be saved. And it is certainly very common for religious people to think that only those with certain beliefs can avoid hell. Thus, the Inquisitor is not some irrelevant relic of the past. A sizable chunk of our country has similar beliefs. All of those people should seemingly agree with the Inquisitor that intolerance is better than tolerance. Of course, almost all Christians are actually still tolerant of non-believers. Of the nearly 200 million believers in hell in our country, basically none of them murder heretics or advocate for throwing atheists in jail. But – and this is Lewis’ point – that seems quite clearly like a big ass mistake. (Like How dare they?! How. dare. they stand around and do nothing while heresies spread, while atheism grows, while eternal souls are lost to Satan and infinite suffering?! That is unbelievably fucked up, if you earnestly believe that only good Christians go to heaven.) Or – better – it’s unbelievably fucked up, if the best we can say in support of toleration is Mill’s story. If that’s all we got, then it is a truly horrendous mistake for Christians who believe in hell to be tolerant.

[Slide 40] Lewis also points out, we are all extremists about something. Most people have views like the Inquisitor’s – i.e. views with incredibly high stakes. Seemingly, most people should feel as the Inquisitor does about the adequacy of Mill’s list. But, this same problem also arises (though, admittedly in a somewhat less extreme form!) for other members of society. The Inquisitor is not some lone counter-example to Mill’s defense of toleration; he’s just a convenient example of a broader pattern of problem cases. We don’t have to stick to religious views to make Lewis’ point. There are plenty of other political positions for which the stakes are clearly, unequivocally huge.

[Slide 41] Many people think that the roughly 600,000 abortions performed in the U.S. each year are acts of murder. Here’re some examples… Those are big stakes!

[Slide 42] Many people believe climate change will gravely impair the well-being of billions of people. Again, those are massive stakes

[Slide 43] Many people believe capitalism is a deadly trap that exploits, coerces, and impoverishes billions of people. For a person who believes that, obviously, the stakes of tolerating capitalism are huge

[Slide 44] Many people think the factory farming system basically tortures billions of morally significant beings each year.

[Slide 45] Many people think a host of pernicious -isms (racism, sexism, ableism, colonialism, etc.) systematically and unjustly oppress billions.

[Slide 46] Lewis’ question is just this, Given how insanely huge the stakes are, why does the environmentalist (or pro-lifer or socialist or whatever) come down in favor of toleration ? Surely the benefits of an Enviro-Inquisition would outweigh the costs? What are a few executions when our very planet hangs in the balance? The traditional, Millian defense of toleration seems entirely inadequate. Lewis’ position is basically this, People think it’s obvious that we should be tolerant of views we don’t like. But… it is really not obvious. And the traditional, Millian defense looks entirely inadequate. Tolerance may ultimately be defensible, but it’s not obvious how. (Despite the pap you were fed in your high school govt class) Like, Jail is bad and so is dead dogma but those things aren’t nearly as bad as billions of lives chewed up by the indifferent capitalist machine – or whatever.

[Slide 47] Lewis’ Defense of Toleration Having argued that Mill’s defense of toleration is inadequate – which, again, pretty closely tracks what we teach kids in high school – Lewis now want to offer us an alternative defense of toleration. His explanation, he thinks, is much more satisfying.

[Slide 48] On many issues, both sides agree that the stakes are high. Both sides would like to eradicate / suppress the other. Lewis case revolves around a number of important observations about the conditions of disagreement on high stakes issues. He argues that a sober-minded extremist should reason that toleration is usually the better of two bad options. So here’s his first observation: ...

[Slide 49] Environmentalists think that climate change would be catastrophically bad The climate change skeptic crowd, on the other hand, think that environmentalist policies would be unnecessarily economically devastating. Thus, each side thinks that the other side is deeply dangerous. Each side has strong incentives to withdraw toleration, to try to suppress and eradicate their ideological opponents

[Slide 50] The pro-life crowd wants to prevent what is, by their lights, an alarming number of murders each year. The pro-choice crowd wants to secure what are, by their lights, basic human rights for women. Again, each side has strong incentives to withdraw toleration and attempt to suppress and eradicate the opposing position.

[Slide 51] Socialists think that capitalism is a deadly trap. The observe position – the anti-socialists – believe that socialism and communism are catastrophic ways of organizing society – catastrophic both in terms of the economy and in terms of human rights.

[Slide 52] On many issues, both sides agree that the stakes are high. On many issues, neither side has the clear upperhand in public support. Which brings us to Lewis’ second observation: He notes that on many of these high stakes issues – issues where both sides have strong incentives to try to suppress and eradicate the other – public opinion is very nearly split down the middle. Neither side is close to winning. Neither side is dominant and in control.

[Slide 53] Again, look at the complex pattern of religious adherence around the world.

[Slide 54] Or the persistent, decads long deadlock in America over abortion ethics

[Slide 55] In the US, of course, a lot of issues simply fall along party lines. And the parties each have a roughly equal share of support.

[Slide 56] On many issues, both sides agree that the stakes are high. On many issues, neither side has the clear upperhand in public support. For both sides, being eradicated would be far worse than mutual toleration . Finally, Lewis points out… If I’m Pro-Life, or whatever, I have the following preferences: (1) The best thing would be for us to successfully suppress and eradicate the Pro-Choice position (b/c this would save the most lives) (2) The second best thing would be for us to continue on in an equal deadlock with the Pro-Choice position (3) The worst thing would be for us to be suppressed and eradicated by the Pro-Choice position (b/c this would save no lives – and I’d be in jail or killed or something)

[Slide 57] On many issues, both sides agree that the stakes are high. On many issues, neither side has the clear upperhand in public support. For both sides, being eradicated would be far worse than mutual toleration . Thus, an out-an-out war is very risky. We might lose! That would be terrible! All of this is to point out: On many issues, people on both sides should be cautious about intolerance. Precisely because the stakes are high and our chances of winning a war of intolerance are about even, an out-and-out war is a very chancy thing. Losing is far worse than tolerating – and tolerating is far worse than winning.

[Slide 58] That, plus two other facts, makes toleration look rather attractive, (i) as Mill has pointed out, there are real downsides to intolerance

[Slide 59] Risk of error Mixture Dead dogma Critical thinking Diversity & individuality State surveillance Suffering of dissidents Again, here’s Mill’s list. Lewis point was never that Mill’s list is irrelevant or stupid . Lewis is only concerned that the badness of the items on the list are likely to get swamped by the badness of climate change, of capitalism, of abortion, or whatever. But the list still matters! The list still does demonstrate that intolerance brings a long a host of problems. These give us some reasons to be tolerant -- even if, at the end of the day, those reasons are swamped by larger considerations.

[Slide 60] That, plus two other facts, makes toleration look rather attractive, (i) as Mill has pointed out, there are real downsides to intolerance (ii) Many people earnestly believe that the truth wins debates Lots of people are basically optimistic about the political system and the tendency for moral progress and justice Eventually, the thinking goes, the side with truth and justice on its side will win any debate.

[Slide 64] For these reasons, Lewis argues, it often makes more sense to tolerate . The alternative is just too risky. The risks of going to war are just too high. However bad things are now – when only some people are heretics or climate skeptics or socialists or pro-choice or whatever – think about how much worse it would be if the heretics won the war and your side is the one being suppressed and eradicated. Plus, Mill has correctly pointed out that there are real and serious costs of intolerance and, more than that, since I know that I’m standing on the side of truth and justice, surely I’ll eventually win the debate anyway. For these reasons, Lewis concludes, it makes most sense to tolerate my ideological opponents – at least, until my team and I get the decisive upper hand in public opinion and can be confident that we’ll succeed at suppressing and eradicating the opposition.

[Slide 65] But that only explains why we might be tolerant about one particular issue. How do we explain why we should be tolerant of basically all views ?

[Slide 66] “First, some toleration of dangerous opinions is justified as a quid pro quo; then other toleration is justified because it makes the first transaction feasible.” -David Lewis

[Slide 67] There are lots of high stakes issues, and ( i) a person may have different allies / opponents on different issues. (ii) a person in the majority on 1 issue may be in the minority on another This seems to justify a blanket treaty of toleration on every issue – rather than a more complex situation where issues X and Y are governed by norms of tolerance while issue Z being decided via a war of intolerance. So, sure: maybe you’ll succeed at eradicating the Pro-Lifers. But are you confident that you’ll survive the Christian Inquisition? And will your Pro-Choice allies speak up for you when they come for the socialists? Thus, Lewis argues, we can explain and justify the commonsense view that we should tolerate bad views. This is a rational thing for us to believe – but the story about why is much more complicated that we might have originally supposed.

[Slide 68] “If you think it would serve utility to ‘withdraw tolerance' from such-and- such dangerous opinions, you'd better think through all the consequences… To the extent that you succeed in withdrawing toleration from your enemy, to that extent you deprive him of his incentive to tolerate you . If toleration is withdrawn in all directions, are you sure the opinions that enhance utility will be better off? When we no longer renounce the argumentum ad baculum, are you sure it will be you that carries the biggest stick?” -David Lewis

[Slide 69] Rather than risk a metastasizing war of intolerance (to which I myself might fall victim) it makes more sense simply to be tolerant – all the time and of everyone.

[Slide 70] We ask, Should we tolerate dangerous views? If so, why? Lewis’ answer, Yes. Because a war of intolerance risks too much, including my own neck! SO recall our original question. ... Recall, this problem arose specifically because we were concerned about people who are exclusivists about salvation – i.e. people who think that their own religion is the only way to be saved. That belief, as we’ve seen, seems to undermine Mill’s original defense of toleration. If you think that Christianity is the only way to avoid eternal damnation and suffering, then you thereby have very good reasons to be intolerant of heresy. Are the 200 million americans who believe in hell simply making a mistake by tolerating the heretics? Here then is Lewis’ answer. No religious people aren’t making a mistake. Yes we have good reasons to be tolerant. Namely...
