# PHIL 3600 - 12 - The Problem of Religious Pluralism

[Slide 1] The Problem of Religious Pluralism

[Slide 2] Religious diversity and disagreement Can we be inclusivists about truth? A look at the evidence

[Slide 3] Here’s a recent list of religions and religious adherents from Wikipedia, sorted by size. You’ll notice, This excludes all of the branches, sects, cults within the larger religions. The categories “traditional religions” and “ethnic religions” are themselves staggeringly diverse. There are lots of religions, is my point. LOTS. Each of them makes some claim to being true. And most of them substantively disagree with the rest.

[Slide 4] On this much, the major world religions agree, There is a supernatural/transcendent reality behind or beyond the physical world of everyday experience. It is only by correctly orienting our lives toward that transcendent reality that we humans can attain salvation, can be saved from the depravities of the human condition. … but try to get more specific than that, and you hit real discord . At one level of description, of course, the major world religions can be aptly said to agree with one another. … As soon as you try to say anything more specific than that, you get rather radically different answers from diff religious traditions. If you ask, for instance, “What is the nature of this transcendent reality, and how do you know it exists?” You’re going to get some very divergent answers. If you ask, “What exactly do I need to do to orient my life toward this transcendent reality you’re talking about?” Again, you’re going to get some very divergent answers.

[Slide 5] There are real, substantive disagreements between these religions. Here’s the punchline:

[Slide 6] Is God minded, and personal ? Or is God an impersonal force ?

[Slide 7] Does time stretch back to infinity... Is time infinite or did God create the universe at some point?

[Slide 8] Or was the universe created at some particular point in time?

[Slide 9] Was Joseph Smith a prophet of God? Was Joseph Smith a prophet of God?

[Slide 10] Is the Quran the word of God? Does the Quran come from God?

[Slide 11] When we die...

[Slide 12] Do we return to the world in another body? Does the Quran come from God?

[Slide 13] Does Anubis weigh our heart against a feather? Does the Quran come from God?

[Slide 14] How is salvation possible?

[Slide 15] Does it require a personal relationship with Christ?

[Slide 16] Or the shedding of the self through meditation?

[Slide 17] Is everyone saved in the fullness of time? Or only a few?

[Slide 18] “There is salvation in no one else [than Jesus Christ], for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved.” Acts 4:12 Here’s that the bible says … ONLY those who accept Christ are saved. NO ONE ELSE

[Slide 19] “That the Jews are participants in God’s salvation is theologically unquestionable, but how that can be possible without confessing Christ explicitly, is and remains an unfathomable divine mystery.” Vatican Document, 2015 But the Catholic church is actually pretty confident that’s not true. – It’s christians AND jews they now believe

[Slide 20] “Indeed, those who were Jews or Christians or Sabeans — those who believed in Allah and the Last Day and did righteous things — will have their reward with their Lord, and no fear will there be concerning them, nor will they grieve.” Quran 2:62 The Quran is also inclusive: It’s Muslims (of course) who will saved – but also Jews, Christians, and Sabeans. (The Sabeans were a people who used to live in Southern Arabia. They don’t really exist as such anymore. But apparently their religious beliefs were sufficiently close to Islam to earn them salvation.)

[Slide 21] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? Here’s the point… I’m obviously not in a position to answer any of these questions definitively! I don’t know how you get saved or which religions are true! But each question is, nevertheless, philosophically interesting. And I want to talk about those first two questions today.

[Slide 22] A lot of people are attracted to inclusivism about religions. If you ask them, “Who’s right about God?” They’ll say, “Isn’t everyone kinda right?” If you ask, “Which religions are rational?” They’ll say, “Aren’t they all?” And if you ask, “Which religion is a path to salvation?” They’ll say, “Surely we all get there eventually.”

[Slide 23] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? The point is: You can be inclusive about any, all, or none of these questions: You can be inclusive about truth – if so, you think that lots of religions are true. You can be inclusive about rationality – if so, you think that lots of religious people, from lots of different religions, have rational beliefs And you can be inclusive about salvation – if so, you think that lots of people, for lots of different religions, will achieve salvation . (And the opposite views are also possible: you can exclusive about truth or about rationality or about salvation. If so, you believe that only one religion is true, or only one religion is rational, or only one religion is a path to salvation.)

[Slide 24] A lot of people are attracted to inclusivism about religions. As a view about truth , though, inclusivism is hard to sustain. … let’s talk about that first kind of inclusive first: Lots of people are attracted to the idea that all the religions are true.

[Slide 25] “Many paths, one mountain” Sometimes you hear this.. The thought being, there’s one big truth about God and the transcendent reality – that’s what’s at the peak – and all the world’s religions are just so many paths starting up from different spots around the base. We’ll all get there in the end; we’ll just see different things on the way up.

[Slide 26] “Each is a different viewpoint on the same object.” Quiz Sometime you hear this metaphor, instead. Each religion is like a 2D sketch of a 3-D object. They are all sketches of the same object, but you have to put them all together and extrapolate into a higher dimension to see the full picture. It’s a nice story and clearly well-intentioned, but that probably can’t be correct. So, Quiz Question: Why not? Why is probably not the case that we can endorse the simultaneously truth of multiple religions?

[Slide 27] Simply, we can’t all be right.

[Slide 28] Either the universe is infinitely old, or it isn’t.

[Slide 29] Either the Quran is the word of God, or it isn’t.

[Slide 30] Either only Christians can be saved, or other people can too.

[Slide 31] Either we will be reincarnated when we die, or we won’t.

[Slide 32] On any particular issue where different religions assert contradictory claims, At most one religion can be correct, can be true.

[Slide 33] How are we to determine which religion is correct? Let’s follow this line of thought a little further. The natural next question is this:... That is, insofar as it’s clear that at most one religion can be right about those matters of substantive disagreement, how should we work out which religion that is?

[Slide 34] Imagine you’re an alien coming down to earth in your fancy spaceship. You notice all these religions – a totally unique phenomenon in the universe, as far as you know. You want what these religions have to offer! But… they clearly can’t all be true . And of course, you want to pick the right one . How will you make your decision? Let me suggest a helpful framing device / thought experiment for answering this question… The point is, obviously, this: try to abstract away from your own religious upbringing and your own cultural embeddedness as best you can. Try to simply consider the question: which religion seems most appealing from the outside ?

[Slide 35] Presumably, you should join the religion that’s best supported by the evidence . Thus, our questions are, What evidence do we have access to? How do we assess evidential support ? “Pick the one that’s best supported by the evidence” is of course just good advice in general. That’s how rationality works, and that’s how one maximizes the chances of having true beliefs. …

[Slide 36] What evidence do we have access to? Quiz Let’s start with that first question. Think about that for a second. What sorts of things might you be able to consult in order to decide which religion is most likely to be true?

[Slide 37] What evidence do we have access to? Religious texts Testimony Consistency w/ other knowledge Here’s my shortlist – I’m not sure if this list is complete , but I think it’s close; I think it’s pretty good … By ‘testimony’, I mean you can talk to other people and hear what they have to say about their own religious experiences and convictions. That’s a potential source of evidence. By ‘consistency’, what I have in mind is that different religions will make different claims about the world, and those claims may conflict with what our best science tells us is true. Insofar as a religion disagrees with science, that may count as some evidence against it.

[Slide 38] So, e.g., a religion that says, “God used evolution and natural selection to bring humans into existence over the course of many millions of years” is more compatible with our best science than a religion that says, “God created the world 6,000 years ago.” You can think about INconsistency as imposing a cost on a religion. Our imagined alien will think, “If I accept this religion, I’m going to have totally revise my understanding of history. That’s unattractive! That makes this religion more costly since i will have to sacrifice a bunch of well-justified beliefs about the world if I want to join.”

[Slide 39] Alternatively, we might put the point this way: To a knowledgeable outsider, everytime a religion asserts a claim that contradicts our best science, that’s going to throw up a red flag that the religion is false. And, obviously, the more red flags get thrown, the less likely our neutral observer is to accept the religion in question. (So for instance, maybe our alien will think, “I guess I can scratch Scientology off the list b/c it claims that the ancient city of Atlantis fought a space war with disintegration rays AND ALSO claims the universe is governed by a Galactic Confederacy. I know both of those claims are false. So, I can safely ignore this religion.”)

[Slide 40] What evidence do we have access to? Religious texts Testimony Consistency w/ other knowledge Unambiguous religious experiences Verified, testable predictions To finish off the list… An “unambiguous religious experience” is an experience that clearly indicates that some particular religion is correct. So, e.g., suppose our the alien has a clear and distinct vision of an angel coming down and saying, “You should believe in Islam. It’s the one true religion.” That would seem to count as some pretty persuasive evidence! (On the other hand, an ambiguous religious experience presumably wouldn’t help, wouldn’t count as evidence for one religion over another. If our alien experiences a sublime sense of peace while watching the sun set, that experience won’t help it decide which religion is true.) Lastly, testable predictions are any claims that the religions makes about the world or about the future that can checked. This is basically the same thing that what we do with scientific theories. A theory that makes testable predictions and whose predictions consistently come true, is thereby better supported. The ability to make accurate predictions is a powerful form of evidence. The theory of general relativity, for instance, makes a bunch testable predictions about the universe. And it turns out, all of those predictions come true, are verified. Those verified predictions count in favor of the theory! Surely the same applies to any religion that makes testable predictions.

[Slide 41] How do we assess evidential support? For simplicity, let’s focus on evidential quality and evidential quantity . Recall, this was our second question: How do we measure the evidence for the different religions, so that we can actually tell which one is the best supported? … For each of our sources of religions evidence, we can simply ask: Does any religion have higher quality evidence ? And Does any religion have more evidence ? (i.e. insofar as more is better, which as we’ll see, isn’t always the case. More evidence isn’t always better.)

[Slide 42] Religious texts Quality : Everybody has some, but there’s no great way to assess their merits. We could ask adherents which ones are best, but we already know what they’ll say. Quantity : Seems irrelevant. The Mormons have an extra book compared to the Christians, but that doesn’t make their view more likely to be true. Let’s start with religions texts. From the outside, does it look like any particular religion is better supported by its religions texts? ...

[Slide 43] Testimony Quality : Each religion’s adherents insist that theirs is the correct view. Everyone is sincere, and there’s no obvious way to tell who’s right. Quantity : Some religions are larger than others – maybe that’s a little helpful? But hardly anyone willingly converts to a new religion. Thus, size differences may largely be explainable by differential birth rates / historical conquest / colonialism. What about testimony? Suppose we go around and talk to everyone on earth and ask them which religion they think we should join. Will that help us out? … Which is to say, it’s true that there are more Christians telling us that Christianity is true than there are Buddhists telling us that Buddhism is true. Thus, there’s a larger quantity of testimony supporting Christianity. But it’s not at all obvious that Christianity’s size is due to its truth or even plausibility. It seems quite possible that christianity is the largest religion because it’s adherents have historically been more successful at having lots of kids and at forcing other peoples to be Christians, at gunpoint. Which, if that’s the explanation, means we shouldn’t take its size as evidence that it’s more likely to be true.

[Slide 44] Unambiguous Religious Experiences Quality / Quantity : Unfortunately, such experiences are quite rare and cannot simply be had at will. Certainly, if I myself have some , that can help me decide. But if I’m only listening to other people tell me about theirs, that’s just testimony again. … and everyone will just insist that their religious experiences clearly favor their own religion. The Christians will insist that their religious experiences prove that the Bible is true; the Mormons will insist that their support the Book of Mormon; etc.

[Slide 45] Consistency Quality : All religions seem to have some consistency issues. Most try to mitigate them. At best we might rule out some religions on the fringe. Quantity : Not helpful. Christians could print out Wikipedia and staple it to the back the Bible (thus making their religion maximally consistent with our present knowledge) but that wouldn’t make Christianity any more likely to be true. How about consistency ? Are there any religions that are super-consistent with our best science? Are there any there super-inconsistent? Start with quality: does any religion fastidiously avoid contradicting out best science? … What about quantity? Well, by “quantity” here, presumably we mean something like, “How many claims does this religion make that are consistent with our best science?”

[Slide 46] Testable Predictions Quality : This would help, if we had some. But most religions only issue posthumous, eschatological, and moral predictions. We can’t observe the afterlife or the End of Days, and no religion consistently seems to produce better people. Quantity : See Above. Finally, what about testable predictions? The short answer is: We don’t really get any. Most religions only issue predictions about (a) what happens after we die, (b) What will happen at the end of days, or (c) what kind of wonderful people we’ll become if we join them. Unfortunately, the first two aren’t testable, and the last one doesn’t really support any particular religion.

[Slide 47] Unless we made a mistake in reasoning just now, the upshot seems to be – no religion stands-out as best supported . It’s not obvious that any religion has a leg-up over the others. At least from the perspective of an outsider – someone who was not raised in any particular religion, nor has any strong cultural attachment to any particular religion, nor has any unambiguous religious experiences – it doesn’t really look like there IS a BEST SUPPORTED religion.

[Slide 48] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? Let’s zoom out. Recall the set-up: There are dozens of religions out there any they disagree about all sorts of stuff. In most of those cases, they literally contradict each other. Thus, at most, one religion can be true. The obvious question is: Which one? I don’t know! I’m not here to tell you which one. But we have just apparently learned something helpful: namely, that it’s not at all obvious from the outside than any particular religion has a better claim than the others to being the true one.

[Slide 49] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? Before we finish for today, I want to quickly look at that second question. While only one religion can be TRUE, it may still be the case that it’s rational to believe in other religions. (If so, we’d say: the adherents of Religion X are wrong, but, given their epistemic situation, it’s perfectly rational for them to continue believing in Religion X. ) So the question is: Which religions is it rational to believe in?

[Slide 50] There are, basically, 3 possible answers, None – there is no religion that it’s rational to believe in One – there is one particular religion that it’s rational to believe in Many – there are many religions that it can be rational to believe in As Zagzebski points out in the reading for this module…

[Slide 51] There are, basically, 3 possible answers, None – there is no religion that it’s rational to believe in One – there is one particular religion that it’s rational to believe in Many – there are many religions that it can be rational to believe in Given our previous discussion, it seem we can rule out the second option. If there WERE one particular religion that stands out as the most and only rational option, it would have to be the one that is best supported by the evidence. But s ince there doesn’t seem to be a particular religion that is better supported than the others, there is no one religion that can uniquely claim to be the only rational one. So we’re left with two options: We can either say that it’s always irrational to believe in a religion. Or, we can say that lots of religions can count as rational. That first option is, obviously, pretty unappealing to all theists, of every religion. So let’s set that aside for now. But what about the 3rd option? Can’t we just say that lots of religions are rational? Maybe! But it turns out, that view has some problems of its own.

[Slide 52] “So religious [pluralism] poses a problem… If we retain our [own religious] beliefs because we judge that they are rational, and also judge that the conflicting beliefs of the atheist and of other religions are rational, we cannot maintain that the rationality of each belief makes it likely to be true…. On the other hand, if we give up our beliefs on the grounds that their rationality is not closely connected to getting the truth,... we are forced to admit that we have given up any chance of getting the truth about a very important matter.” – Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski Here’s how Zagzebski puts it. Let me try to gloss the problem she has in mind here.

[Slide 53] There’s supposed to be a tight connection between rationality and truth . To call a belief ‘rational’ is to approve of it as likely to be true , given the evidence . To see the concern, we need to say a bit about rationality claims. What does it mean to say that a belief is rational ? One obvious thing we’re doing when we call a belief ‘rational’ is approving of it and complimenting it – more particularly, we are complimenting it as truth-apt, as a good belief to have, given one’s interest in believing true things. That is to say... … Put differently, it’s a good thing to have rational beliefs! A person with all and only rational beliefs is doing better than a person with lots of irrational beliefs. And, more precisely, they are doing better truth-wise. The person with lots of irrational beliefs is, thereby, a person who surely has lots of false beliefs.

[Slide 54] Here’s an easy example: Suppose you believe that it’s going to rain on Tues, Wed, or Thurs (and quite possibly all of them) after looking at this forecast. I’d call that a rational belief, given the evidence. Good job! Good beliefs. Now, of course, it certainly could turn out that it rains none of those days. Your rational beliefs could turn out to be false. But they’re still good beliefs. The alternative beliefs – that it won’t rain on Tues nor on Wed nor on Thurs – are clearly worse beliefs. Indeed, unless you have some special insight into the weather, those seem like positively irrational beliefs. They’re way more likely be false! (Again, they could turn out to be true beliefs! Irrational beliefs can sometimes be true. But they are still bad beliefs because they are unlikely to be true. If you looked at this forecast and concluded that it’s gonna be nonstop sunshine all week, you’d be doing a bad job at believing. In sum, the point is this: There is supposed to be a tight connection between rationality and truth. To call a belief rational is, usually, just is to say that it’s the belief that’s most likely to be true, given the evidence.

[Slide 55] An analogy You and 9 friends can’t agree on where to go to dinner, so you decide to roll a d10. One number per person; winner chooses. Aaron (2) and Rakim (4) each say, “ I honestly believe that I’m going to win. And I think that that belief is rational – but so is his belief. ” (* points across the table *) They insist on this, even when you point out that there’s only a 10% chance of winning and that, odds are, both beliefs are false. So. This gives rise to a problem for the person who wants to say, most religions are raitonal. To get at the problem, let me offer an analogy. … The point being, this is a weird thing to insist on. Aaron thinks his belief is rational, even though there’s only a 10% chance that it’s true. And aaron also thinks that Rakim’s belief is rational, even though there’s only a 10% chance that his belief is true. Those two beliefs beliefs are incompatible and are probably false – and yet, he insists, are rational to have. In this case, it seems, it’s really not much of a compliment to call those beliefs rational. They aren’t, actually, likely to be true. They are very, very likely to be false.

[Slide 56] There are, basically, 3 possible answers, None – there is no religion that it’s rational to believe in One – there is one particular religion that it’s rational to believe in Many – there are many religions that it can be rational to believe in Zagzebski points out: That’s what it sounds like when we endorse the 3rd option, and insist that lots of religions can count as rational. The details, obviously, depend on how many religions you accept as being genuinely on-the-table and rational – but let’s say it’s 10. That means, when you say that another person’s religious beliefs are rational, you are saying more-or-less the same thing as Aaron and Rakim: While there’s only about a 10% chance that that person’s beliefs are true (assuming again, that there’s no particular reason to favor one religion over another), their religious beliefs are nevertheless rational. Very very likely to be false, but rational. Good belief! I approve. Which, again, a strange use of the word ‘ rational’. That usage really unmoors the approval of the belief from the likelihood that the belief is true.

[Slide 57] There is religious disagreement. The major world religions disagree about all sorts of stuff. This raises different questions, depending on your interests, If your interest is in truth : Which religion(s) are true? If it’s in being rational : Which religion(s) are rational? If it’s being saved : Which religion(s) can save me? Recall the big picture here: all of these questions arise out of the fact of religious disagreement. There’s obviously a lot more to be said about those first two questions (about which religions are true and which rational), but this is a good place to stop. Next module, we’ll talk a bit about that third question – more specifically, about some puzzling implications that arise for people with exclusivist views about religious salvation – i.e. people who think that only certain religions can save people.
