# PHIL 3600 - 22 - The Badness of Death

[Slide 1] The Badness of Death

[Slide 2] Set-up & review On well-being From the Lawmaker Argument From the Weirdness Argument The presumptive badness of death A case The deprivation account The No Subject Argument Justification Objections / replies The Symmetry Argument

[Slide 3] Last module… According to many religions, your death is an event that you survive – death is just the transitional event between this life and the afterlife. … Last module we talked about this idea and what philosophical complications it gives rise to. We asked, “How is it that YOU, the person, survive the corruption and decay of your earthly body? What essential parts of you are surviving that process such that your death doesn’t actually kill you?” That’s the religious perspective on death. Today I want to shift gears and talk about the atheistic perspective on death.

[Slide 4] Today, let’s suppose that’s wrong, that your death is actually the end of you. Death , we’ll say, is the event in which a person permanently ceases to be .

[Slide 5] I want to look at a couple surprising arguments about this notion of death , first introduced by the Epicureans. (circa ~300 BCE) They argued, Your death is not bad for you . … Here, again, death is to be understood as the event in which you permanently cease to be. Let me say a bit more about this notion of something’ being bad for you.

[Slide 6] On well-being

[Slide 7] The Steppe-child You are a female child born in 1693 to a desperately poor family in the Eurasian Steppe. From the moment of your birth, you receive very little affection or attention from your parents, who wanted a son rather than a daughter. You are malnourished, under-stimulated, and largely neglected. This continues until age 4, at which point you take ill with smallpox and die. Here’s an easy case to get us started. Imagine the following... … Now consider the course of your actual life, and compare your real life to that of the Steppe-child. Assuming your life has not been much, much worse than the life of the average American, you probably agree with the following: My life is better than the life of the Steppe-child Given a choice, any sensible person would choose a life like mine over a life like hers. For pretty much all of us, I suspect, this is an easy judgment to make. We are well-practiced at evaluating our own lives and the lives of other people; we are used to thinking about what we want (and DON’T want) for ourselves and for our loved ones.

[Slide 8] Some observations Some things that befall us in life are good and beneficial while other things are bad and harmful; all else equal, a life with lots of good things and few bad things is better than a life with lots of bad things and few good things; we all want for ourselves, for our children, for our friends and loved ones to have good lives and not bad lives. The Steppe-child case points us toward some more general, commonsensical observations… … I take it none of these observations are groundbreaking or particularly controversial. Notice: each of these facts involves a central notion: that of human well-being – or of welfare, or of a good life, a life that goes well for the person whose life it is. Many other familiar expressions in everyday English involve the same notion – we talk about our ‘quality of life’, about having ‘a life worth living’, and about things being ‘in one’s best interest’. There’s a whole branch of philosophy concerned with this idea, with human well-being – with these sorts of evaluations of how well our lives are going.

[Slide 9] Quick terminological note We’ll say an event harms X (is bad for X) when it has a negative impact on X’s well-being . (e.g. X’s being injured, sick, robbed, neglected, disappointed) And an event benefits X (is good for X) when it has a positive impact on X’s well-being. (e.g. X’s being healthy, loved, successful, happy, comfortable) Real quick: let me define a couple terms that will be useful for our conversation today. ... I think these definitions more-or-less track our everyday English uses of these two words, but I wanted to explicit about how I’ll be using them.

[Slide 10] It harms the Steppe-child that she… is born into poverty is unwanted by her parents is malnourished is neglected and understimulated get sick with smallpox dies at such a young age Ok, so, recall, the Steppe Child case again. We readily judge that the child’s life is not going well. She has very little prudential value; she is not faring well. That’s because she has lots of bad things in her life and not a lot of good things. We can list off all the bad things in her life, all the harms she’s suffering in her short 4 years... That last idea is the main event for today. Pretty much all of us agree that death is among the bad things that can happen to people – and even more so if you don’t believe in an afterlife. (next)

[Slide 11] Commonsense Dying is (usually) harmful / bad for us The Epicureans Dying is never harmful / bad for us …. But, as it turns out, there are some provocative – and not at all silly – arguments against this idea. So this is the central philosophical puzzle we’re talking about today: most people think death is bad-for us; we’ll look at a couple arguments that seem to show otherwise. (Recall, death is, for today, a permanent ceasing to be. So the thought is: it’s usually bad for people to permanently pass out of existence. )

[Slide 12] The presumptive badness of death Before we look at those arguments, though, I want us to try our best to explain that commonsense intuition that death, permanently ceasing to be, is usually bad for us.

[Slide 13] Your best friend has been diagnosed with terminal cancer. You’re very upset about this. You feel bad for her that she will die soon. She sees that you’re upset and tries to comfort you, “ Don’t worry. I’ve been given some medicine to make sure my last few months will be pain-free and, indeed, rather pleasant. ” Let’s start with a case...

[Slide 14] This cheers you up a little, but you still feel terrible. “ Don’t worry! ” She says again. “ I really don’t fear dying at all. I’ve come to terms with it. So I won’t waste my last few months feeling depressed or anxious. ” Again that’s a little comforting – but only a little.

[Slide 15] Finally she says, “ Look, I know it’s going to be miserable for you when I’m gone. You’ll have lost a great friend! But that’s not a reason to feel bad for me . I’ll be dead! I won’t be missing you ; I won’t be feeling or thinking anything. So, honestly, don’t feel bad for me. It’s not a misfortune for me that I’m going to die. ”

[Slide 16] Seemingly, your friend’s death is still bad for her , even though she won’t feel bad . (won’t be in pain / feel anxious / miss her friends) So death must be bad for another reason. … There must be, in other words, some other sort of harm that your friend is overlooking, some other respect in which her death will be legitimately bad for her.

[Slide 17] Proposal Some events are bad for us not b/c they hurt or b/c they cause future bad things but b/c they block us from getting good things. Let’s call these ‘ harms of deprivation ’ Here’s the standard suggestion in the philosophy literature, among the people who work on well-being and death: What your friend is missing is an entire category of harm… Here’s a case: suppose you lie down for a quick nap before some event that you’ve been really looking forward to – maybe a concert or a party. Only, you accidentally sleep through the whole event. It seems right to say that your being asleep during the concert is bad for you – and it would have been good for you for someone to wake you up. But why is tha? Why is it bad for you to be napping? It obvs doesn’t feel bad – and it doesn’t lead to any future bad events (like, no one’s mad at you or anything; it doesn’t cause you to be depressed or homeless or whatever). Rather, it seems like your nap is comparatively bad for you. Being asleep was bad for you because you would otherwise have been doing something really great. Your nap deprived you of all the good experiences you would have otherwise had at the concert or the party. That’s the sense in which the nap was bad for you.

[Slide 18] Or here’s a different case: suppose you are randomly selected to win one of those Publishers Clearing House awards – you know, that thing were they show up at your door with a video camera and a comically large check. However, before you can be presented with the winnings, I steal that giant-ass check from the giant-ass checkbook and cash it myself. There is no replacement check. You win nothing. But you never find out that any of this has happened! You didn’t enter any contests, and you have no idea that you’ve won. As far as you know, nothing bad has happened to you. Clearly, what I did was bad for you. But, Why was it bad for you? Well not because it caused you pain or disappointment, since you didn’t know the money was coming. Rather, it was bad because I DEPRIVED you of something that would have been good for you.

[Slide 19] “ Why is death bad? Because when I’m dead I don’t exist. And if we ask, how can it be the case that non-existence is bad ? The answer is, because of the lack of the good things in life. When I don’t exist, I am not getting the things that I could have otherwise gotten, if only I were still alive . Death is bad because it deprives me of the good things in life . This is nowadays known as the deprivation account of the… badness of death, since it holds that what is centrally bad about death is that it deprives you of the goods of life you might otherwise be getting. ” – Shelly Kagan In the reading for this Module, Shelly Kagan proposes that death is like this, too...

[Slide 20] Proposal Death is one of these deprivation harms – bad for us not b/c of how it feels but b/c of what it makes us miss out on . This is the Deprivation Account – it’s a popular explanation for why death is bad for us. … The Deprivation Account says that death is bad in pretty much exactly the same way that napping through a party is bad. Death is like the ultimately, final nap. Once you die, you miss out on all of the parties and all the concerts forever. This is, I think, a nice commonsensical account of the badness of death. It can explain a number of our intuitions about death.

[Slide 21] Quiz According to the Deprivation Account , why is it worse for a 22-year-old to die than for an 82-year-old? … b/c the 22 year is deprived of many more good things, suffers a much greater loss . I think this is a plausible explanation. And, thus, I think this is a reason to like the Deprivation Account.

[Slide 22] Josef works as a janitor in a govt “intelligence” facility. A political dissident has just been brought in for interrogation. Josef’s knows how this ends: the prisoner will be tortured – cruelly, ceaselessly, for years – until his body gives out. That’s how this always goes, for prisoners. For weeks, Josef hears the man screaming and pleading for death as unspeakably awful things are done to him. One night, Josef slips a poison into the man’s food. He dies quietly in his sleep. Quiz QUIZ: Why, according to the Deprivation Account, is the prisoner’s death a benefit rather than a harm? … Since the prisoner’s future contains mostly torture and suffering, killing the prisoner’s deprives him of mostly bad things. And, thus, his early demise is not bad for him. It is , we might say, a benefit of deprivation to poison him, rather than a harm of deprivation. I also think this is a plausible explanation. And, thus, I think this too is a reason to like the Deprivation Account.

[Slide 23] Commonsense Dying is (usually) harmful / bad for us The Epicureans Dying is never harmful / bad for us Ok, so that’s enough set up. We have this commonsensical view that dying is, in most cases, a serious misfortune. And we’ve seen one plausible explanation for that view: dying is bad for us b/c it deprives us of all the good things in our future. Our next task is to look at the Epicurean Arguments against this view.

[Slide 24] The No Subject Argument

[Slide 25] “ The most terrifying bad thing, death , is [not bad for] us, since as long as we exist, death is not there, and when death is there, then we do not exist. Death, therefore, is nothing to the living or the dead, since it does not exist for the former and the latter no longer exist. ” – Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus The actual surviving text from Epicurus, where he presents this argument, is actually terse. Here’s what he says,... Obviously, this argument is SO CONDENSED that we’re going to have to do a fair bit of work to unpack it. So let’s do that: let’s try to charitably reconstruct the argument.

[Slide 26] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die... 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die… ... C. My death isn’t bad for me How does the argument go exactly? I think the skeleton of the argument is pretty easy to work out… That’s the outline. Lets take those ellipses one at a time and try to fill in those gaps.

[Slide 27] “ The most terrifying bad thing, death , is [not bad for] us, since as long as we exist, death is not there , and when death is there, then we do not exist. Death, therefore, is nothing to the living or the dead, since it does not exist for the former and the latter no longer exist. ” – Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus Quiz Why isn’t death bad for me before I die? QUIZ: So how should we finish the thought? What’s the general principle he’s appealing to explain why death isn’t bad for the living? He seems to be saying, deaht isn’t bad for the livbing because they haven’t actually died yet. The general principle is: a future event, a thing that hasn’t actually happened yet, cannot right now be bad for you.

[Slide 28] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die… ... C. My death isn’t bad for me … Why is this plausible? Well, we’ve encountered this idea before this semester: Backwards causation is incoherent. An effect cannot precede its cause.

[Slide 29] I can’t die today from a bullet you fire next week . You can’t hear thunder ten minutes before the lightning strikes . You can’t be harmed today by your death in 60 years. Recall these examples:... This is a commonsense metaphysical principle about the ordering of cause and effect. One event happens, that causes another event to happen, in that order. Everytime. Never the reverse. Never, an effect happens and then, sometimes later, it is caused to happen.

[Slide 30] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die… ... C. My death isn’t bad for me So that seems like a plausible and charitable way to interpret the first part of the argument. What about that second claim? What’s the idea there?

[Slide 31] “ The most terrifying bad thing, death , is [not bad for] us, since as long as we exist, death is not there, and when death is there, then we do not exist . Death, therefore, is nothing to the living or the dead, since it does not exist for the former and the latter no longer exist . ” – Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus Why isn’t my death bad for me after I’ve died? Well, he says, because you don’t exist anymore. Why does that matter? What’s the general principle he’s appealing to here? The thought seems to be harms require subjects; harms only ever happen to , you know, existing things

[Slide 32] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm ... C. My death isn’t bad for me … Why is this plausible? Why should we accept this?

[Slide 33] To be struck by a car – to be harmed by car violence – you need to have a body (and also exist!) Only existing things can be harmed by car violenvce

[Slide 34] To be harmed by theft, you need to own property. Since only existing things own property, only existing things can be harmed by a robber

[Slide 35] To be hacked, you need to have a computer system. (and also exist!) Etc. etc.

[Slide 36] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm ... C. My death isn’t bad for me In short, you might think claim 2 is true b/c when we look at common examples of harms, they are all things that can only happen to existing beings. But there’s a second reason for thinking claim 2 is true

[Slide 37] Imagine a couple who has sex exactly once, gives birth to a healthy child, and then (painlessly) kills the child. We want to say, the child is harmed . He’s deprived of a normal, happy life.

[Slide 38] Suppose, instead, that the couple simply decides never to have sex. (which results in that same would-have-been child never having a normal, happy life.) Same outcome, but no one says, the child is harmed . Why not?

[Slide 39] Presumably, b/c you can’t harm something that doesn’t exist . Being harmed requires being real – i.e. actually having well-being / interests that have been negatively affected. … An action isn’t harmful unless there’s someone for whom it’s a harm – a real entity, with well-being, whose interests have been set-back by the harmful event.

[Slide 40] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm ... C. My death isn’t bad for me So I think this IS a charitable way to understand Epicurus argument. Death can’t be bad for me after i’ve died, b/c by definition, I don’t exist. And nothing can harm me if I don’t exist – just like nothing can harm all of the children I could have conceived in my life, but didn’t

[Slide 41] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm ... C. My death isn’t bad for me There’s just one more thing we need to add to make this a valid argument… [next slide]

[Slide 42] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm 3. If my death is bad for me, there must be some particular time at which it’s bad C. My death isn’t bad for me Something like this:… The implicit premise here is that to be harmed, there must be some particular time at which you are harmed. Why would think this is true? Well, again, I think this principle is confirmed by any common example of harm you can think of.

[Slide 43] If I have a headache from 7am to 4pm, I am harmed during that time frame.

[Slide 44] If X buries a landmine in 1965 that blows off Y’s legs in 2018, Y is harmed in 2018. (and probably thereafter, until their death)

[Slide 45] 1. Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. 2. Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm 3. If my death is bad for me, there must be some particular time at which it’s bad C. My death isn’t bad for me More generally, we might say: to do harm is to have a particular sort of effect on a person and on their life. But people exist in time, as do lives. When you affect someone (whether by harming them or in some other way), you don’t affect them timelessly or always, you affect them during their lifespan. This is the intuitive thrust of that third claim.

[Slide 46] The No Subject Argument P1) Death isn’t bad for me before I die b/c one cannot be presently harmed by future events. P2) Death isn’t bad for me after I die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm P3) If death is bad for me , there must be some particular time at which it’s bad C) Death isn’t bad for me To summarize then, this is the argument – what I’ll call the ‘No Subject’ Argument, after P2 which is the innovative premise.

[Slide 47] Responding to the No Subject Argument

[Slide 48] Objection What about the moment of death ? Maybe that’s when death is bad for me. Quiz We’ve said something about why death isn’t bad before you die and about why death isn’t bad after you die, but – you might be thinking – what about in between? Maybe there’s a particular moment of death and that moment – being neither before nor after – is when death is bad for you. QUIZ: Can you see why this probably isn’t going to work? What’s the problem with this proposal?

[Slide 49] Objection What about the moment of death ? Maybe that’s when death is bad for me. Reply In that moment , are you alive or dead? If alive, death hasn’t happened yet; if dead, you don’t exist to be harmed. It seems like we can just re-run the original argument, applied to that particular moment....

[Slide 50] Objection What about posthumous harm ? If *I* can do things after you’ve died that are bad for you, surely your death is bad for you. Here’s another possible objection. You might think, there’s no puzzle here, since we already believe in the existence of posthumous harm. That is, we already agree that people can harm us after we’ve died! Here’s a plausible case: Suppose, you tell me on your deathbed that you want me to scatter your ashes on your favorite mountain. This is really important to you. You make me promise to do that. Then when the time comes, I don’t feel like climbing a mountain, so I flush your cremation remains down my toilet. We might think about this case, This is a clear instance of harm: there was a thing you wanted and that I promised to do for you. THen i broke my promise, violated your trust, and thwarted your desire. You were harmed, even though you’d already died. But hey! Since I can harm you after you’ve died, surely your own death can be harming you after you’ve died.

[Slide 51] Objection What about posthumous harm ? If *I* can do things after you’ve died that are bad for you, surely your death is bad for you. Reply True – IF posthumous harm is possible, death can be a harm. But is it? The No Subject Argument applies here, too. Here’s the problem, though. The possibility of posthumous isn’t a solution, it’s part of what’s at issue... Epicurus’ point is that you can’t be harmed by your own death once you’re already dead. He’s going to say that same exact thing about my flushing your ashes. You can’t harmed by that; you’re already dead. [next]

[Slide 52] The No Subject Argument (Posthumous Harm Edition) P1) Flushing your ashes isn’t bad for you before you die b/c you can’t be presently harmed by future events. P2) Flushing your ashes isn’t bad for you after you die b/c only existing things can be subjects of harm P3) If flushing your ashes is bad for you , there must be some particular time at which it’s bad C) Flushing your ashes isn’t bad for me To make the point more vivid: Look! We can simply revise the original argument to show that my flushing your ashes isn’t bad for you. So I don’t know whether posthumous harm is possible or not. The point is that this issue is hostage to the exact same argument. We can’t reject the No Subject Argument simply by invoking posthumous harm.

[Slide 53] Objection Maybe non-existing people can be harmed. Death harms me by depriving me of good things, though I don’t exist. Reply That implies that the bajillions of people who could have been born (but weren’t) are harmed by their non-birth. (are deprived of good things despite not existing) Here’s a different possibility. Maybe we should abandon this idea that non-existing people are unable to be harmed. Maybe harms don’t require existing subjects. Death is still a very serious deprivation for me. By dying I lose out on all the good stuff in life. Maybe we should just be comfortable w/ saying that not existing is bad for me when I don’t exist. We’ve already seen, though, where this suggestions runs us into trouble... We dont want to say that abstinence is exactly as harmful as infant-murdering. It’s true that both actions deprive a being of a good life. But clearly those aren’t the same thing. Infanticide seems like a real harm. Abstinence doesn’t. It doesn’t because unconceived children don’t exist. But… now we’re back where we started. Apparently, if you don’t exist, you can’t be harmed.

[Slide 54] Objection Maybe non-existing people can be harmed but only if they exist at some point or other . One final suggestion raised by Kagan in the article i had you read for this module, seeks to thread the gap between these two claims. Maybe, he says... … This seems to solve the problem. Since our unborn children never exist, we don’t have to count them as harmed by never-having-been born. They are deprived of good things, but it’s not a harm b/c they never existed. But since the dead did once exist, they do count as harmed. THeir death deprives them of good things and it IS a harm b/c they did exist.

[Slide 55] Objection Maybe non-existing people can be harmed but only if they exist at some point or other . Reply Maybe? This sounds rather ad hoc . (“What if we solve the problem by saying death is the exception to the rule ?” Compare : “Maybe all harms happen at particular times, except not death, that’s the one exception.”) I’m not totally sure what to say about this proposal. It works, technically, but it also strikes me as a bit suspicious...

[Slide 56] The Symmetry Argument As ever, there’s much more to be said here about the No Subject Argument. HOwever, I want to close by looking at another argument we get from the Epicureans for the conclusion that death isn’t bad for us. This argument picks up the intuitive idea that we were just playing with: namely, the idea that the non-existence of the unborn isn’t bad for them.

[Slide 57] “ Look back now and consider how the bygone ages of eternity that elapsed before our birth were nothing to us. Here, then, is a mirror in which nature shows us the time to come after our death. Do you see anything fearful in it? Do you perceive anything grim? Does it not appear more peaceful than the deepest sleep? ” – Lucretius, De Rerum Natura THis argument is found in a work of a later Epicurean, Lucretius. He writes... As before, the text is incredibly elliptical, leaving us to do a lot of the work filling in the gaps of the argument.

[Slide 58] But the basic idea is clear enough. Lucretius is point out the important symmetries between our post-death non-existence and our pre-birth non-existence. Why are we afraid of death? Not b/c it will hurt (it won’t), not b/c we’ll feel sad (we won’t). but seemingly b/c we’ll not be around to enjoy life. We like life; we want to spend as much time as we can doing all of the life stuff. All of that is true of the many years we spent not-yet-alive. It wasn’t painful for us to not be alive in 1950. We didn’t feel sad about not being alive in 1950. But, it’s equally that true that we weren’t around to enjoy life. And, again, we LIKE life; we want to spend as much time as we can doing all the life stuff. This is Lucretius’ point: these two periods (our pre-birth and post-death periods) seem symmetric w/ respect to our well-being and interests.

[Slide 59] The Symmetry Argument 1) Our pre-birth non-existence and our post-death non-existence are, in all respects relevant to well-being, symmetric. 2) Our pre-birth non-existence wasn’t bad for us . C) By symmetry, our post-death non-existence won’t be bad for us Since the two periods are symmetric, surely we should regard them as having the same relevance to our well-being. Either both periods are bad for us, or neither is. Lucretius says, Look obviously our pre-birth non-existence wasn’t bad for us. How silly! No one regards their own pre-birth absence from the world as a great misfortune. Thus, by symmetry, we should take the same stance toward death… This is the Symmetry Argument – which again, aims to show that our death (our permenantly ceasing-to-be) isn’t bad for us. Let me make a couple remarks in closing about how we might respond to this second argument.

[Slide 60] The Symmetry Argument 1) Our pre-birth non-existence and our post-death non-existence are, in all respects relevant to well-being, symmetric. 2) Our pre-birth non-existence wasn’t bad for us . C) By symmetry, our post-death non-existence won’t be bad for us A first option is to try to identify some relevant difference between the two periods of non-existence – a difference that will allow us to explain why our post-death non-existnece is bad but while pre-birth non-existence isn’t. I’m not sure what that looks like. Maybe you all will have some ideas.

[Slide 61] The Symmetry Argument 1) Our pre-birth non-existence and our post-death non-existence are, in all respects relevant to well-being, symmetric. 2) Our pre-birth non-existence wasn’t bad for us . C) By symmetry, our post-death non-existence won’t be bad for us A second option is embrace the symmetry and accept that, in fact, our pre-birth non-existence was bad for us. Maybe when we think about all the stuff we missed out on by not having a longer life that started earlier, it will actually start to seem like a misfortune, like a harm that we weren’t around for all of it.

[Slide 62] The Symmetry Argument 1) Our pre-birth non-existence and our post-death non-existence are, in all respects relevant to well-being, symmetric. 2) Our pre-birth non-existence wasn’t bad for us . C) By symmetry, our post-death non-existence won’t be bad for us Lastly, of course, we can accept the conclusion. Since the two periods do seem symmetric, and since our pre-birth non-existence clearly wasn’t a misfortune, we might conclude: our death won’t be bad for us either. There’s nothing to fear from our permanently ceasing to be. Ok. I’ll close off here. And I’ll be interested to hear your thoughts on these arguments in our discussions this module.
