# PHIL 3600 - 18 - Divine Command Theory

[Slide 1] Divine Command Theory

[Slide 2] Morality and religions Background On the connection between world religions and morality Introducing Divine Command Theory Realism, Relativism, and Subjectivism Defending DCT An argument in support of Moral Realism 3 arguments in support of Divine Dependence The Euthyphro Dilemma

[Slide 3] Our question for the next couple weeks is this, What is the connection between God and ethics / morality ? … is ethics primarily a religious matter? … is God the source of morality – and, if so, in what sense? … and if there’s no God, does that mean there are no moral rules?

[Slide 4] The 3-O God God is a being who is O mnipotent, O mniscient, and O mnibenevolent (i.e. morally perfect .) This question has lurked in the background of a number of our discussions already. The 3-O God, after all, is Omnibenevolent – which I cashed-out at the time as “morally perfect.” I never actually spelled out what that means with any precision, though. I didn’t give you an account of moral perfection! I didn’t even say much what morality is supposed to be. I’ve just been relying on our everyday understanding of what it means to be morally good.

[Slide 5] I think that’s enough, at least when it comes to understanding the Problem of Evil. We all understand what it means, more-or-less, to assess someone as a good or bad person. I can say, for instance, Mr. Rogers was a good person, and you basically understand what I mean, even though I’ve never defined ‘goodness’ for you. You understand that Mr. Rogers was good in the sense that he was kind and caring and generally well-behaved. We’ve been saying the same thing about God: God is a good person. (The 3-O God is, in fact, the best possible person .) We might not know precisely what that entails – being the best possible person – but I think we can see the general outline.

[Slide 6] Saying that God is morally perfect is, I think, really informative – even if we never stop to define moral perfection! Like, consider Zeus. We know that Zeus is not a 3-O God because, among other reasons, he is not morally perfect . The ancient Greeks unequivocally describe Zeus as jealous and as petty and, worst of all, as a serial rapist. Obviously, no being like that could ever be considered the best possible person . Zeus is not the 3-O God.

[Slide 7] Our question for the next couple weeks is this, What is the connection between God and ethics / morality ? All of that’s to say: these ethical notions have already been in play this semester; we’ve been employing them successfully. We just have yet to really investigate them. So that’s what I want to do for the next couple weeks! We’re going to talk about ethics/morality and about the connection between those things and God. (Quick terminological note: most philosophers use the words ‘morality’ and ‘ethics’ interchangeably. I’ll be doing that too. For our purposes, ethics and morality are the same thing)

[Slide 8] Morality and religions To get us started, I want to roughly sketch the central point of connection between morality and religions.

[Slide 9] Nearly every major world religion includes moral directives – i.e. rules about acceptable behavior . Here’s one important connection… Let me give you some illustrative examples

[Slide 10] When a foreigner resides among you in your land, do not mistreat them. The foreigner residing among you must be treated as your native-born. Love them as yourself, for you were foreigners in Egypt. Leviticus 19:33-34 Here’s a moral rule from the Torah or Old Testament. “Don’t be mean to immigrants and foreigners”

[Slide 11] You have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘You shall not murder, and anyone who murders will be subject to judgment.’ But I tell you that anyone who is angry with a brother or sister will be subject to judgment. Matthew 5:21-22 Here’s one from the New Testament “Do not kill and don’t even get angry”

[Slide 12] Walk not on the earth with conceit & arrogance. Verily, you can neither rend nor penetrate the earth, nor can you attain a stature like the mountains in height. Quran 17:37 Here’s a moral rule from the Quran. “Do not be arrogant”

[Slide 13] The Master said: Do not be concerned that no one recognizes your merits. Be concerned that you may not recognize others. Analects 1:16 Here’s a moral rule from the Analects, one of the central texts of Confucianism. “Do not humble and appreciative of others”

[Slide 14] 1. I observe the precept of abstaining from the destruction of life. 2. I observe the precept of abstaining from taking that which is not given. 3. I observe the precept of abstaining from sexual misconduct. 4. I observe the precept of abstaining from falsehood. 5. I observe the precept of abstaining from intoxicants that cloud the mind & cause carelessness. Five Precepts (Buddhist tradition) This is the core set of moral rules for Buddhist laypeople (i.e. non-monks) “Don’t kill. Don’t steal. Don’t rape. Don’t lie. Don’t do drugs”

[Slide 15] Ahimsa is the not causing of any pain to any living being at any time through the actions of one’s mind, speech, or body. Satya is the speaking of the truth that conduces to the well-being of creatures, through the actions of one’s mind, speech, or body. Asteya is not coveting of another’s property through the actions of one’s mind, speech, or body. Sandilya Upanishad Here’s a bit of moral instruction from the Upanishads, a series of sacred Hindu texts “Don’t cause pain. Don’t lie. Don’t be envious.”

[Slide 16] Again, basically every major world religion includes moral directives . So, why is that? … is morality primarily a religious matter? … should atheists think ethics is bullshit? … or is ethics so central to human affairs that all religions inevitably comment on it?

[Slide 17] Lots of people in the world think, Religion is the source of morality , & atheists can’t be good people . A little less than half think that in the U.S. But elsewhere it’s basically everyone. In Indonesia 96% of people think this is true, that religion is required for morality. As stated, of course, this view is rather non-specific. There are a variety of different ways to (also, I should note: the second claim doesn’t actually follow from the first view. Suppose religion IS the source of morality. Maybe b/c God decides what the moral rules are. That could be true, and there could still be atheist who obey all of God’s rules. There’s nothing contradictory about that. Nor even particularly surprising, if God’s rules are also legal rules. (e.g. God say DONT KILL and so does the law. Atheist who obey the law are thereby also obeying God. So don’t conflate these two claims. The second doesn’t actually follow from the first.)

[Slide 18] Divine Command Theory This module we’re going to talk about Divine Command Theory, which is probably the most common version of this view that religion is the source of morality.

[Slide 19] “All [religions] are different, because they come from men; morality is everywhere the same, because it comes from God.” – Voltaire To give you the flavor of Divine Command Theory, i’ve pulled some statements of the view from a few historical notables. ...

[Slide 20] “Without God and [the promise of] eternal life… everything is permissible, one can do anything.” – Fyodor Dostoevsky

[Slide 21] “There is no Good save obedient behavior, save the obedient will… The Good consists in always doing what God wills at any particular moment.” – Emil Brunner (Brunner was a swiss theologian)

[Slide 22] Divine Command Theory is the view that morality comes directly from God . It says, “ morality consists in acting in accordance with God’s Will, in following God’s List of Universal Rules of Behavior . ” Here’s the quick version of the view… The really short version of the view is this: “What’s right is right b/c God says it’s right. What’s wrong is wrong b/c God says it’s wrong.”... Let me draw your attention really quickly to two points: First, it’s important for the view that rules be universal. They’re like laws, but instead of applying only within a particular domain or state (like, say, Colorado) they apply everywhere. They apply throughout God’s domain. Second, it’s important for the view that the rules be fixed by God’s will. The rules are from God in a really intimate way. When God tells us not to kill, She’s saying that killing is not what she wants for the world. This is what Brunner was saying, “Morality consists in always doing what God wills at any particular moment.”

[Slide 23] On DCT, slavery is immoral b/c God hates slavery and commands us not to engage in it

[Slide 24] According to DCT, rendering aid and assistance is morally good b/c God like it when we help each other and commands us to do so

[Slide 25] Murder, war, torture – all of these are, according to DCT, things that God dislikes and tells us not to do.

[Slide 26] Divine Command Theory consists of two independent claims: Moral Realism : there are moral facts , and those facts are objective – i.e. are true independent of our attitudes about them Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) That’s the gist of the view. But I want to make explicit the underlying structure of Divine Command Theory. You should think of the view as a combination of two independent claims… I do ultimately want to offer some arguments in support of each of these claims, but before we can do that, we HAVE to talk about Moral Realism, about what it even IS

[Slide 27] On Realism, Relativism, & Subjectivism So. We’re about to start a VERY lengthy detour through metaphysics and metaethics. Bear with me.

[Slide 28] Consider the claim, Cilantro is delicious. Quiz Suppose you have two friends who disagree about this – maybe the two of them come from different countries. They keep arguing about it. One can’t believe the other likes cilantro; the other is skeptical that one doesn’t love it. What are you going to tell them to end the argument? Probably you’re going to say that taste is subjective. People experience food in different ways and that’s ok. And there’s just never going to be some universal fact of the matter about cilantro’s taste being either delicious or nasty. There’s no contradiction in saying it’s delicious for me and nasty for you.

[Slide 29] Consider the claim, Tipping your waiter is rude. Quiz Suppose you have two friends who disagree about this – maybe the two of them come from different countries. They keep arguing about it. One insists that tipping a waiter is super- rude and against all social customs; the other insists that it’s actually polite and widely-expected. What are you going to tell them to end the argument? Here, you’ll probably point out that rudeness, politeness, and good manners are going to be different in different communities, for different cultures. In the U.S., the consensus view is that tipping is a polite thing to do. That’s what our culture has decided. But other culture can and have made other decisions. In Iceland, for instance, tipping is considered rude. Neither country is wrong! They just have different norms.

[Slide 30] Consider the claim, H 2 O is a polar molecule. Quiz Suppose you have two friends who disagree about this – maybe the two of them come from different countries. They keep arguing about it. One insists that H2O molecules are polar; the other insists that water molecules are non-polar. What are you going to tell them to end the argument? Here, I think, you’ll tell them to google it or will reach for your chemistry textbook. There is actually a fact of the matter here – namely, water molecules are in fact polar. That’s true. That’s not subjective; it’s not culturally constructed; thats just an accurate description of the distribution of electric charge on water molecules in our universe.

[Slide 31] Observation Some sorts of truths are individually determined , are fixed by our own attitudes. Other sorts of truths are culturally-bound, are determined by our social context . O ther sorts of truths are universal , are independent of personal/cultural status . Here’s the point. ... This seems to represent, I think, our commonsense opinions about how truth works, in different domains. When it comes to thinks like deliciousness , what’s true seems purely subjective – such that the deliciousness facts may be different for different people, depending entirely on their own personal experiences. When it comes to things like politeness facts most people agree that what’s true is relative, is fixed by one’s cultural or social circumstances – such that the politeness facts may be diff in diff places Finally when it comes to things like chemistry, most people agree that what’s true is neither subjective nor relative, is independent of human attitudes. Let me introduce some terms to streamline these points.

[Slide 32] Subjectivism | Truth is fixed by an individual’s own experiences (a claim may be true-for-me but false-for-you) Most people are Subjectivists about tastes ( “Cilantro is delicious ” ), about smells ( “Gasoline is profoundly stinky ” ), and about aesthetics in general ( “The Mona Lisa is a supremely beautiful painting” ). Let’s call ‘Subjectivism’ the view that truth (in some particular domain) is fixed by an individual’s own experiences.\ … NOTICE, each of these examples is restricted to a particular domain or area of life. To be a taste subjectivist is to think that claims about deliciousness in particular are subjective. To be a subjectivist about aesthetics is to believe that claims about beauty and art are subjective. One could also be a chemistry subjectivist – only, that’s not a very plausible view. It’s not very plausible that each individual gets to *find their own truth* about chemistry, gets to decide whether water molecules are polar-for-me, or whether chlorine exists-for-you.

[Slide 33] Relativism | Truth is fixed by the norms of a particular community (a claim may be true-for-us but false-for-ya’ll) Most people are Relativists about etiquette ( “It’s polite to tip your waiter” ), about language ( “ Chips are long, narrow wands of fried potato” ), and about about social norms in general ( “It is normal to have more than 5 children” ). Here’s a name for that second category… Again, relativism is a view that one has about particular domains or areas of life. Most people are relativists about language – most people accept that what a word means is fixed by whatever linguistic community one finds oneself in. Most people are not relativists about taste, nor are people relativists about physics. Intuitively, my community doesn’t get to decide whether cabbage is tasty; *I* get to decide that. For myself. Obversely, neither my community nor I get to decide whether atoms have protons. They do. That’s just true everywhere, independent of our attitudes. If our community decides otherwise, we’re simply wrong about atoms

[Slide 34] Realism | Truth is independent of individual experiences/social norms (each claim is either true everywhere or false everywhere) Most people are Realists about math claims ( “The number 16 is divisible by 2” ), about logical claims ( “It’s impossible for there to be a married bachelor” ), and about about scientific claims in general ( “H 2 O is a polar molecule” ). Finally, here’s name for our third category… Realism, like Subjectivism and Relativism, is domain-specific. Most people are realists about chemistry but not realists about taste or about etiquette. There are no universal deliciousness facts nor any universal politeness facts.

[Slide 35] Subjectivism | Truth is fixed by an individual’s own experiences (a claim may be true-for-me but false-for-you) EX | “Cilantro is delicious. ” “‘Baby Shark is the greatest song of all time. ” “The smell of lilacs is disgusting .” Relativism | Truth is fixed by the norms of a particular community (a claim may be true-for-us but false-for ya’ll) EX | “It is rude to tip your waiter.” “It is normal to have more than 5 children.” “The word ‘fuck’ has a sexual meaning and is obscene. ” Realism | Truth is independent of individual experiences/social norms (each claim is either true everywhere or false everywhere) EX | “H 2 O is a polar molecule.” “A car tire has more mass than an electron.” “The number 16 is divisible by 2.” So, here are our three views. Each view is plausible in some domains and implausible in others. I think most people understand all this pretty well! Also most people have never explicitly worked through these ideas. Now, this is just a Cliff Notes version of the metaphysics at issue here. So if you’re thinking, “Wait, aren’t there other views than just these 3? And can’t these views sometimes combine in complex ways?” Yes! Totally. But this detour has already been long enough.

[Slide 36] Metaethics & Divine Command Theory Ok, so all of that was metaphysical background. The point is to ask about moral claims. There’s an entire field of philosophy – called ‘Metaethics’ – dedicated to this conversation. What are we talking about when we’re talking about ethics?

[Slide 37] The Big Question , Which of these views is most plausible in the moral domain ? Here’s our Big QUestion… We make moral claims all the time. We say things like, The prison system is unjust and inhumane or Masturbation is morally fine, totally unobjectionable or One should always get consent before intimately touching another person. How should we think about those moral claims? Should we Subjectivists about those claims? Or Relativists? Or Realists?

[Slide 38] Let me you an example to illustrate what we’re asking. So consider: lots of cultures, historically, practiced child sacrifice. That is, they would ritualistic kill young children in order to please (they thought) some supernatural entity. This happened all over the world, in all sorts of culture. We have, for instance, credible contemporary reports and solid archaeological evidence that the Phoenicians and Carthaginians – who were sea-traders on the Mediterranean – practiced child sacrifice. They would periodically kill a bunch of their own young children to appease their gods. This is common anymore of course. But let’s suppose there’s some small country today that takes up this historically common practice. Say, Denmark. The whole country of Denmark gets swept up in a Punic and Phoenician religious revival, and they start enthusiastically sacrificing young children to Baal Hammon.

[Slide 39] EX | “ Child sacrifice is immoral. ” Moral Subjectivism ? (“ I find child sacrifice repulsive; he thinks it’s good. Neither of us is wrong . We just like different things. ”) Moral Relativism ? (“ Our society thinks child sacrifice is monstrous; theirs thinks it’s great. No one’s wrong . It’s just cultural diversity. ”) Moral Realism ? (“ Child sacrifice is, simply, immoral. Some people think otherwise, but those people are confused and wrong. ”) Now, obviously, if you were to conduct a survey in the US on this issue, pretty much everyone would agree with this moral claim, that child sacrifice is immoral. So here’s our Big Question: how should we understand the truth conditions for that claim? Should we be relativists? Subjectivists? Realists? … (I should note in passing, there are other possible views here. If you want to learn about them, take a Metaethics course! It’s good stuff. We’ll stick to these 3 b/c they’re the most popular. Of the hundreds of students I’ve had, roughly 99% accept one or the other of these views.)

[Slide 40] EX | “ Child sacrifice is immoral. ” Moral Subjectivism ? (“ I find child sacrifice repulsive; he thinks it’s good. Neither of us is wrong . We just like different things. ”) Moral Relativism ? (“ Our society thinks child sacrifice is monstrous; theirs thinks it’s great. No one’s wrong . It’s just cultural diversity. ”) Moral Realism ? (“ Child sacrifice is, simply, immoral. Some people think otherwise, but those people are confused and wrong. ”) Quiz Quick temperature check: which way are you personally leaning right now?

[Slide 41] Divine Command Theory consists of two independent claims: Moral Realism : there are moral facts , and those facts are objective – i.e. are true independent of our attitudes about them Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) Ok. Now recall, Divine Command theory consists of 2 claims. One of those claims is Moral realism. We just talked about that. You should now hopefully understand what that means and what the most common alternatives are. Divine Command Theory is a really common moral view among religious people, and one part of the view is that there are universal moral facts. That’s part of what the view says. We haven’t said anything about why you might think Moral Realism is true. So let’s do that now.

[Slide 42] “ We know objective moral values exist because we clearly apprehend some of them . The best way to show this is simply to describe moral situations in which we clearly see right and wrong: torturing a child, incest, rape, ethnic cleansing, racism, witch burning, the Inquisition, and so forth. If someone really fails to see the objective moral truth about such matters, then he is simply morally handicapped , like a color-blind person who cannot tell the difference between red and green, and there's no reason to think that his impairment should make us call into question what we see clearly.” — William Lane Craig Here’s the argument we get from William Lane Craig in the reading assigned for this module.

[Slide 43] That’s… not a great argument. (“You should accept Moral Realism b/c you already agree that there are universal moral facts . At least, you do if you’re not broken .”) I think we can do better! … this argument isn’t quite circular, but it’s surely unpersuasive. The people he should be trying to persuade just are the people who deny that there are universal moral facts. And he’s not going to change their minds merely by accusing them of being broken inside. Let me try to charitably offer a more sophisticated (and, I think, more persuasive) version of Craig’s argument

[Slide 44] Before I do that though, I want to note: Inevitably, arguments about moral realism end up mentioning really evil, really serious things – things like child abuse, domestic violence, and sexual violence. So, i wanted to issue a quick CONTENT WARNING at the top here to let you know that’s coming. I won’t be describing those things in any great detail but they will come up, and I’ll ask you to think about them. And… yeah, you know your own needs. Please do what you need to do, take care of yourself.

[Slide 45] Moral Subjectivism ? A better way to defend moral realism is to point out some of the deeply unappealing consequences of moral subjectivism and moral relativism. Let’s start with subjectivism. Recall, pretty much everyone is a subjectivist about tastes and smells. Like, I think vinegar smells terrible – just literally I think it’s the worst smell in the world. But maybe you like the smell of vinegar; maybe it’s your favorite. We disagree. But… it’s a funny sort of disagreement, since it’s not like either of us thinks the other is genuinely wrong . Rather, we think the other has different preferences when it comes to the smell of vinegar. Each of us has our own subjective experience of the smell, and my experience isn’t true-er or better than yours. It’s just mine. My experience of vinegar is authoritative over me, but it shouldn’t be authoritative over you. And vice versa.

[Slide 46] Moral Subjectivism ? Should we have the same view about ethics? Is ethics also subjective? Well, if you listen to how people talk, they mostly don’t sound like they think it’s all just a matter of taste. People don’t say, “My own personal experience is that policing in America is deeply evil and unjust. But I know that it doesn’t bother you. And – hey! – that’s your truth. If you like police brutality, then I’m not going to yuck your yum.” Nor do people say, “I personally would never kick my dog or sexually assault my child. The very thought of doing that makes me sick to my stomach. But my neighbor is really into dog kicking and child assaulting! While *I* obviously don’t like that, my own moral subjectivity can never be authoritative over him. Dog kicking is like pineapple on pizza – awful and not my thing, but also, you know, not like OBJECTIVELY awful. Different strokes and all that!” Again, I pretty much never hear anyone say anything like that. Which is strong evidence that most people don’t actually believe that ethics is merely a matter of taste.

[Slide 47] Moral Relativism ? What about relativism? I think is a far more common (and more plausible) view. Recall, most people are relativists about language and meaning. By convention, the middle finger gesture means screw you. That’s what our language community has decided is the symbolic content of that gesture. That’s not subjective. It doesn’t depend on your feelings or perceptual experiences. The middle finger simply and truly means screw you in our community. Now, how that gesture makes you feel, is subjective. You may find it offensive, or you may not. That’s a matter of taste. But the meaning isn’t a matter of taste. It’s fixed by convention. Which implies, of course, that it could have meant something else if we’d settled on a different convention. There’s a nearby possible world where that same gesture could be used to mean Good morning, best friend! Or Care for a spot of tea and a biscuit? But that’s not the meaning it actually has around here.

[Slide 48] Moral Relativism ? Should we have the same view about ethics? Is ethics also just a social convention? We could say, “Our community has made certain decisions about which actions are allowed and which aren’t. Those rules are real and true; they aren’t matters of taste. But they are nevertheless only true by convention. Those rules could have been different; we could easily have settled on a different convention. Different communities ultimately do settle on different conventions and that’s why there’s cross-cultural disagreement about ethics.” Except, I don’t think many people actually believe this either. Again, if you listen to how people talk about ethics, they mostly don’t sound like they think it’s all mere convention .

[Slide 49] Consider sexual harassment and the #MeToo movement. By convention, sexual harassment was normal and permissable behavior in basically all Western cultures until about 60 years ago. The phrase ‘sexual harassment’ didn’t even exist until the early 1970s. But when you listen to the way that people talk about the #MeToo movement, they don’t say that sexual harassment used to be ethically permissible by convention. They claim that sexual harassment has always been sexist, immoral, and unjust. Likewise w/ spousal rape and domestic violence. There have been plenty of cultures where, by convention, husbands were permitted have sex with their wives whenever they wanted and didn’t need consent. (This was true in all of the English speaking world until about the 1950s.) And there have been plenty of cultures (including parts of the historical US) where, by convention, husbands were permitted to engage in non-lethal domestic violence against their wives. Moral relativism is clear on these cases. All of the men who sexually and physically assaulted their wives in those times and places did not do anything immoral. Because, by convention, that was a thing that husbands were permitted to do. Again, my impression is that most people think that’s false. Most people think that those men were engaging in very, very serious moral misbehavior. Thus, most people aren’t moral relativists.

[Slide 50] Here’s another quick case. This graph is a historical accounting of US public opinion on interracial marriage. As you can see, it wasn’t until 1997 (!!!!) that more than half of Americans approved of inter-racial marriage. (That’s within my lifetime. That’s crazy.) The conventional opinion in 1980 clearly was that interracial was deeply inappropriate. So ask yourself, Do you agree that interracial couples in 1980 were doing something morally inappropriate ? Again, my impression is that pretty much everyone thinks, No. Meaning, pretty much everyone does not have the proper intuitions to count themselves a moral relativist.

[Slide 51] Divine Command Theory consists of two independent claims: Moral Realism : there are moral facts , and those facts are objective – i.e. are true independent of our attitudes about them Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) Alright. That’s a defense of Moral Realism – an attempt to improve on Craig’s rather disappointing argument. There is, of course and as always, a lot more to be said here – in support of Realism, in defense of subjectivism and relativism, and in support of yet other views that we don’t have time to talk about. But moral realism is only ½ of Divine Command Theory. The other half is the claim I’m calling Divine Dependence – the idea that objective moral facts – whether there are any or not – could only ever come from God.

[Slide 52] Why should we think Divine Dependence is true?

[Slide 53] Argument #1 – The Law maker Argument

[Slide 54] Laws don’t just happen; someone (a lawmaker!) has to create them.

[Slide 55] Where do Federal laws come from? ONLY FROM CONGRESS. You’ll notice, the 1 st Amendment doesn’t say, “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof… NOR SHALL ANY LAWS OF THIS SORT APPEAR OUT OF THIN AIR.” They didn ’t need to explicitly forbid laws appearing out of mid air b/c that’s not a thing. Laws don’t do that. Laws come from lawmakers.

[Slide 56] Imagine someone saying, “The law about driving on the right side of the road just appeared one day in the law books. Very mysterious! But what are you gonna do? It’s the LAW.”

[Slide 57] Not only do laws come from lawmakers, laws only have authority because the lawmaker has authority. Even if laws did appear out of thin air, we probably wouldn’t feel like we needed to obey those laws. They don’t have any authority over us.

[Slide 58] The Lawmaker Argument Quiz Think about it for a second. How do these conderations support Divine Dependence, exactly? What’s the argument going to look like?>

[Slide 59] The Lawmaker Argument P1) All laws require a lawmaker P2) If Moral Realism is true, there are moral laws C) If Moral Realism is true, there is a moral lawmaker ( viz. God ) Something like this.

[Slide 60] Argument #1 – The Law maker Argument Argument #2 – The Weirdness Argument

[Slide 61] While we can imagine moral laws existing w/o God, they would be VERY WEIRD

[Slide 62] Q: Where do the moral facts come from? Divine Command Theorist : God. Atheist Moral Realist : Nowhere?

[Slide 63] Q: How long have the moral rules existed? Divine Command Theorist : Since God created them Atheist Moral Realist : Always?

[Slide 64] Q: Why are the right things right , and the wrong things wrong ? Divine Command Theorist : B/c God says so Atheist Moral Realist : They just are?

[Slide 65] Q: How do we learn the moral rules ? Divine Command Theorist : God tells us about them Atheist Moral Realist : We evolved that way?

[Slide 66] “ Moral values seem to exist as properties of persons, not as abstractions – or at any rate, I don't know what it is for a moral value to exist as an abstraction. [Atheists don’t have an] adequate foundation in reality for moral values, but just leave them floating in an unintelligible way.” – William Lane Craig Here’s Craig, summarizing the Weirdness Argument for Divine Dependence

[Slide 67] The Weirdness Argument P1) If Moral Realism is true, there must be an adequate explanation for where the moral rules come from, how we learn about them, etc. P2) If atheism is true, then there’s no adequate explanation for Moral Realism . (It’s too weird !) C) Moral Realism is true only if atheism is false.

[Slide 68] Argument #1 – The Law maker Argument Argument #2 – The Weirdness Argument Argument #3 – The Motivation Argument

[Slide 69] Consider some law that you think is stupid.

[Slide 70] Maybe, Drug bans

[Slide 71] Or, liquids ban on airplanes

[Slide 72] Or Exotic Animal bans. Also, can we talk about that blanket? WEIRD. It’s like lying on a rug that looks like it was made from your cousin’s skin.

[Slide 73] Why obey a stupid law? What’s the motivation? Quiz (don’t over think it! Just: why do you do that? What keeps you obedient even when it comes to dumb laws?) … Presumably, b/c you’ll be punished if you don’t. If you disobey the law and try to bring an open gallon of milk onto an airplane, they’ll – AT BEST – toss your milk away. If you disobey the law and try to do some cocaine, you can get fined or go to jail.

[Slide 74] Consider some moral rule that you think you should follow (but don’t)

[Slide 75] Maybe you think that you should eat less factory farmed meat

[Slide 76] Maybe you think you should be donating more of your money to charity

[Slide 77] Maybe you think you should be doing more to help the environment (recycling more, driving less, using biodegradable materials) (The Great Pacific Garbage Patch)

[Slide 78] M Maybe you think you should stop buying sweatshop clothing

[Slide 79] We obey the law to avoid punishment. But... W hy should we obey the moral rules ? Most of these things you can get away with not doing. No one’s going to shame you. No one’s going to punish you. So … why should you bother? Relatedly, think about other sorts of wrongdoing that a person might know they can get away with (though they would be punished and shamed, if other people found out) Think about, e.g., peeping in someone’s window as they undress, embezzling money from a young child, abusing someone in a coma. Those things clearly violate common sense moral rules. But why should we care? What’s the motivation not to violate the moral rules when we know we’ll get away with it?

[Slide 80] If God is the author of morality , we have a ready answer: God cares. God will punish / reward us . … on the other hand, if there isn’t a God, it’s not clear what answer we can give here. That’s potentially trouble for the atheists who want to be moral realists.

[Slide 81] The Motivation Argument P1) If Moral Realism is true, there there must be good reasons for us to obey the moral rules. (even when we know that other people will let us break them!) P2) If atheism is true, then there’s no good reason to obey the moral rules. C) Moral Realism is true only if atheism is false.

[Slide 82] Argument #1 – The Law maker Argument Argument #2 – The Weirdness Argument Argument #3 – The Motivation Argument Divine Dependence – objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them, only if they stem from God’s Will. Those are the three argument we get from Craig in support of this second claim.

[Slide 83] Divine Command Theory consists of two independent claims: Moral Realism : there are moral facts , and those facts are objective – i.e. are true independent of our attitudes about them Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) So that’s Divine Command Theory. DCT is the view that there are objective moral facts and that those facts flow from God’s will – could only ever come from God’s will. As an aside: Craig points out that this view can be wielded as an argument for the existence of God. And that’s true! If you can persuade an atheist that DCT is true – if you convince him that God is the author of morality – then you will have thereby convinced him that God is real. But as a practical matter, I’ve never heard of anyone taking that particular path to theism ( First you realize that ethics is objective and then you realize that God is only explanation for ethics. Finally, you reluctantly accept that God exists.) That’s why I’m not talking about that argument per se .

[Slide 84] The Euthyphro Dilemma As we’ve seen Divine Command Theory is a really common view worldwide. However, it’s not common among philosophers. That’s b/c most philosophers think the view was put to bed over 2,000 years ago by the greek philosopher, Plato. So I want to close by looking at that famous argument of Plato’s. The Euthyphro Dilemma, an objection to Divine Command Theory. (The Euthryphro is one of Plato’s dialogues. Plato’s writings are all in this form. He wrote what are, effectively, plays or dramatic conversations. The main character in his dialogues is Socrates (who was Plato’s IRL mentor) and in the dialogues, we find Socrates chatting about philosophy with other various Athenians – real people usually. The Euthyprho is a short dialogue where Socrates talks to a man called Euthyphro about goodness and piety and morality.)

[Slide 85] Socrates asks, “What is morality ? What makes something right or wrong?” Euthyphro suggests, “What’s right is doing the things that the gods love and command of us; what’s wrong is doing the things that the gods hate and forbid .” … Hopefully, you can see: this just is Divine Command Theory. Euthyphro is sayings, morality consists in acting in accordance with God’s (or THE gods’) will.

[Slide 86] Socrates asks, “Are the right things right because God says they’re right , OR does God say they’re right because they are right ?” In the dialog, Socrates isn’t satisfied with this answer because he thinks DCT has an unresolved ambiguity concerning the direction of explanation between the things that God likes and the things that are morally correct. So he asks for clarification… As we’ll see, this question poses a problem for DCT b/c neither answer is particularly. (Hence, why it’s called a dilemma. A hard choice between two bad options.) But we need to unpack that question. Even just grammatically, that’s a doozy of a sentence. SO I wanna make sure we’re all on the same page about what’s being asked.

[Slide 87] Consider something that’s good to do . Maybe – g iving aid to those who need it. Here’s the thought.

[Slide 88] DCT claims both of these things are true, It is good to aid the needy. God wants and commands us to aid the needy. One of these explains the other. But which way does it go? … That’s not a coincidence that both of those things are true – and it’s not brute co-variance either! DCT says that there’s a tight, explanatory relationship between the goodness of an act and what God’s wants/commands of us... Plato asks, Are the good things because God says so, or does God says so because they are good?

[Slide 89] Here’s an easier example, with the same formal structure. Here’s a flagpole. it exists. The flagpole-shadow also exists. And one of these explains the other. We can ask, Does the flagpole exist because of the shadow, or does the shadow exist because of the flagpole. Clearly the latter. The flagpole explains the existence of the shadow. And not the other way round. The shadow does NOT explain the flagpole.

[Slide 90] Plato isn’t asking about things and their shadows, obvs. He’s asking about the explanatory relationship between mental attitudes and facts about the world. This is sometimes called the direction of fit question. Do the mental attitudes come first and do they EXPLAIN why the world is the way that it is? OR Does the world first come to be a certain and then THAT EXPLAIN why we have the attitudes we have?

[Slide 91] Here’s an example Suppose it’s raining and you believe that it is raining. Do you believe that it’s raining b/c it is raining, or is it raining b/c you believe it is? (next slide)

[Slide 92] Clearly, you believe that it’s raining b/c it is. FIRST it’s actually raining. That’s true in the world. And then you believe it. The state of the world explains your mental state.

[Slide 93] ANother case. Denzel Washington is one of the most popular people in America, according to public polling on likeable Americans. We have two facts: Denzel is popular. People like Denzel. We can our same question: Is Denzel popular because people like him or do people like him because he’s popular?

[Slide 94] Clearly, Denzel counts as popular BC people like him. FIRST, a bunch of individual people like Denzel. THEN that’s makes it true in the world that Denzel is popular. In this case, our mental states explain the way the world is.

[Slide 95] Quiz Think about whatever hobbies or activities you do to relax (e.g. watching tv, playing music, gaming, crafting, running) You enjoy your hobbies and they’re worthwhile. We can ask our same question, And I’ll make this one a quiz Are your hobbies worthwhile b/c you enjoy them, or do you enjoy them because they’re worthwhile?

[Slide 96] PROBABLY, the direction of fit is mind-to-world. First, you find some activity that relaxes you and is enjoyable. THEN that makes it the case that that activity is a worthwhile use of your time. Your mental attitudes EXPLAIN some fact about the world. (In principle, I suppose, one could go about it the other way. Look for some worthwhile and then force yourself to enjoy them. But… that’s a weird thing to do. )

[Slide 97] One more care. Breathing carbon monoxide is dangerous. And, suppose, you’re afraid of accidentally breathing a bunch of carbon monoxide. We can ask our same question, Do you fear carbon monoxide because it’s dangerous, or is it dangerous merely because you fear it?

[Slide 98] Clearly, you fear it because it’s dangerous. FIRST it’s true in the world that carbon dioxide can kill you. And then that causes you to be afraid.t. The state of the world explains your mental state. (COMPARE: If you have an irrational fear of rice, then the explanation seems to go in the other direction. Rice isn’t objectively, independently dangerous. Rather, first you fear rice, and then that makes it true that rice is dangerous for you. (maybe causing you to have a panic attack or something.) (next slide)

[Slide 99] In each of these cases, we want to know whether my attitude is responding to some pre-existing external fact about the world, or whether my attitude invents or makes true the external fact. Which comes first, which explains the other: the fact or the attitude? (next slide)

[Slide 100] Socrates asks, “Are the right things right because God says they’re right , OR does God say they’re right because they are right ?” This is Plato’s question about DCT. The Divine Command Theorist claims, “God is the source of morality. The morally right things are just those things that God approves of.” And Plato asks: “Does God approve of the morally right things because they’re morally right or are they morally right only because he approves them?” Which is it? Which comes first – the approval or the moral rightness?

[Slide 101] Option #1 – God says that the right things are right b/c they are (independently) right. Option #2 – The right things are right (merely) b/c God says so. This is a dilemma because the theist has only two choices and both appear unattractive:

[Slide 102] Option #1 – God says that the right things are right b/c they are (independently) right. Implies that Divine Dependence is false – and, thus, that DCT is false. If Option #1 is correct, then God is not actually directly necessary for morality. Option #1 amounts a rejection of the Divine Dependence claim. The moral facts don’t exist merely as an expression of God’s will. They are, instead, independent facts about the world. Option #1 says: first, there are moral facts in the world. First it’s true that, say, that murder is wrong. AND THEN those independent facts explain God’s attitudes, explain God’s dislike of murder. On Option #1, God is noticing out-in-the-world facts about morality. If we adopt that picture, we have abandoned Divine Command THeory.

[Slide 103] Option #2 – The right things are right (merely) b/c God says so. Compatible with DCT , but implies that morality is arbitrary. ( and Subjective in an important sense!) On the other hand, if Option #2 is correct, then we are saying that God’s attitudes really do come first. If God is the source of all moral reasons, then God had no reasons for saying that certain things were wrong and other things right. The picture is: FIRST, God made some subjective, arbitrary judgment calls (literally for no reasons ) and then those divine preferences gave rise to morality. It is bad to murder b/c God arbitrarily decided to dislike murder. It’s good to help the needy because God arbitrarily decided that that’s dope. Notice, that implies, if God had commanded us to kick the needy, then that would have been a good thing to do. Now, we might want to say, “hold on! That’s not how it went at all! God would never command us to kick the needy! That’s inconceivable, given Her moral perfection.” Maybe! But this is Plato’s point. WHY? Why is it that God would never command us to kick the needy? Presumably b/c… kicking the needy is bad. And God would never tell us to do something bad. But notice, now we’ve retreated back to Option #1 and abandoned DCT. We’re saying: God would never tell us to kick the needy b/c God’s preferences aren’t arbitrary. We’re saying that God knows that kicking the needy is wrong. Wrong not b/c God says so, but for some other reason. The reason that God says it’s wrong is because it is wrong. That’s option #1. And that might be true, but that story clearly appears to be incompatible with DCT. Option #2 says, in contrast, that God’s Will is the true source of morality, is the only thing grounding and propping-up the moral rules.

[Slide 104] Child sacrifice is against the rules of morality Traveling is against the rules of basketball Compare: the rule against travelling in basketball. Why is it against the rules to travel? Is there some independent, universal fact about the badness of traveling – of walking without constantly bouncing the game ball? Of course not. There’s no deep justification for the rule against traveling. If you ask, BUt WHY can’t I travel? The answer is: that’s just not part of James Naismith’s original design. That’s just a rule he came up with! At best, maybe that rule makes the game more interesting and fun. That seems to be more-or-less what we’re saying about the moral rules on Option #2. If the right thing are right only because God says so, then there no deep justification why God decided that child sacrifice is against the rules. BUT WHY can’t I sacrifice children? The answer is: that’s just not part of God’s original design. That’s just a rule She came up with! At best, maybe that rule makes life more interesting and fun.

[Slide 105] Option #1 – God says that the right things are right b/c they are (independently) right. Option #2 – The right things are right (merely) b/c God says so. This is the Euthyphro dilemma. Either the moral rules are independent of God (and so Divine Command Theory is false. Morality is more than God’s Will) OR the moral rules are no more and no less than the unreasoned and arbitrary preferences of the divine. That’s compatible with Divine Command Theory, but that strikes a lot of people as a deeply implausible characterization of morality.

[Slide 106] Divine Command Theory consists of two independent claims: Moral Realism : there are moral facts , and those facts are objective – i.e. are true independent of our attitudes about them Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) That’s Plato’s objection to DCT. The view, if taken seriously, seems to undermine the importance of the very thing it’s supposed to explain. It makes morality appear arbitrary and largely uninteresting. Obviously and as always, There’s a lot more to be said about DCT and about the Euthyphro, but I’ll leave off her. There’re also other ways we might make sense of the connection between god and morality. We’ll look at those in the next module.
