# PHIL 1000 - The Free Will Theodicy

[Slide 1] The Free Will Theodicy

[Slide 2] Recap The Free Will Theodicy Motivations Replies Last time we looked at 3 bad responses to the problem of evil – solutions that don’t even look plausible on their face. Today I want to talk about a much better solution: the free will theodicy. This theodicy has been historically very popular and influential.

[Slide 3] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary suffering . (b/c She would know about it, want to prevent it, and be able to) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary suffering . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Evil Possible Responses: Reject P1 Reject P2 Accept C Preferred theist option To my knowledge, almost no one has tried to argue that P1 is false. It just… looks very obviously correct, to both theists and atheists. How could an all-powerful, all-knowing, perfectly good being possibly allow unnecessary suffering? And of course, most theists aren’t going to like the third option. They want to continue believing in a 3-O God. Thus, we’re left with Option 2: we have to find a way to reject P2. We must argue, There has never been – not even once – an instance of unnecessary suffering.

[Slide 4] The Free Will Theodicy

[Slide 5] Imagine God’s position in the moment you decide to do something wrong. She can either, Let you act OR Step in and stop you What should She do? One good way to get at the free will theodicy is to imagine God’s position as she watches you choose to do something bad. (PICTURED: God watching over your shoulder as you send an unsolicited dick pic or something)

[Slide 6] It might seem like no-big-deal for God to step in. But consider for a moment what the world would look like if god always did that. Imagine a world in which God makes all of our choices for us. She picks out our outfits in the morning, decides what we’ll eat, where we’ll work, who we’ll live with, how much Netflix we’ll watch, how often we’ll sing God’s praises, etc. God decides whom we’ll love and with whom we’ll procreate – and then, of course, once our children are born, God takes full control of their lives too. Each life is, of course, morally perfect: You always do the right thing (b/c you have no choice.) You love your neighbor as yourself (b/c you have no choice.) You love God with all your heart, mind, soul, and strength (b/c you have no choice.) (think of this as the Puppetmaster world – where God is pulling all the strings)

[Slide 7] This is a defective world – both from God’s perspective and ours . Here’s the punchline: a lot of people think that this world sucks. There’s a good reason why God doesn’t make all of our decisions for us – why she doesn’t consistently intervene to make us act in ways she’d prefer. There’s little value in loving God and one another if we don’t freely choose it There’s little value in being good unless we have to struggle with evil In our puppet world, no one has the power to do make or change anything – and that’s part of why the world seems defective God should ask herself, Why even bother with humans if I’m just going to puppetmaster them?

[Slide 8] Observation There’s something really important about human freedom – about our ability to be the authors of our own decisions. This has important religious implications. It’s positively good – from God’s perspective – that humans be allowed to make decisions for themselves. It’s positively bad for God to make all our decisions for us. Hopefully you can: this Good Thing – human freedom – may give us a way to make sense of evils as necessary.

[Slide 9] What’s so great about freedom ? Free choices have weight . The s truggle to choose and the ability to do otherwise give our choices meaning. The freedom to make and re-make our world is a valuable gift. Before we look at the details of that theodicy, though, let’s spend a little more time thinking about freedom and why we might think it’s really good and importna.t Here are 3 different suggestions.

[Slide 10] Imagine a bratty child who apologizes to you only after her parents demands it. Or a movie where the hero gets saved at the last minute by God, rather than by the villain. Or a surprise Valentine’s Day card gushing about how great you are. Signed by your mom. Here are some cases that seem to support these claims about the value of free choice through struggle The point is this, these gestures aren’t very meaningful. And the reason in each case seems to be roughly the same, These actions do not represent free choices through struggle. They aren’t powerful because they aren’t backed up by the right sort of surprising, impressive freedom.

[Slide 11] The Free Will Theodicy Freedom is good because it gives our choices weight, meaning, & power. It forces us to struggle and grow. Freedom is bad because we may misuse it to do evil. Thus, God faces a choice, preserve our freedom and allow evil OR prevent evil and revoke our freedom In short, then, And we can see this puts God in a bit of pickle… The Free Will Theodicy consists of the view that the first choice is allows better. It’s always better for God to preserve our freedom and allow evil than to prevent evil and revoke our freedom

[Slide 12] The Free Will Theodicy It is consistently worse to violate a human’s free will than to allow evil. Thus, the suffering that stems from human choices is necessary suffering. More precisely, this is the view.

[Slide 13] Why doesn’t God force parents to love their children? Free Will Theodicy : She knows that chosen love is a greater good, one that can only be secured by respecting parents’ freedom. Recall a theodicy is a story that a theist tells to make sense of why some particular instances of suffering are necessary – needed for some greater good or to prevent some greater evil. So here’s an example of the free will theodicy in action.

[Slide 14] “Cat burning was a form of zoosadistic entertainment in 17th century Paris, France. In this form of entertainment, people would gather dozens of cats in a net and hoist them high into the air from a special bundle onto a bonfire… The assembled people “shrieked with laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted, and finally carbonized.” – Wikipedia , “Cat Burning” Here’s another example, using a strange historical evil. People used to burn cats for fun.

[Slide 15] Why did God allow people to burn cats for fun? Free Will Theodicy – She knew that it would be worse to violate the people’s free will than to prevent the cats’ suffering. Here’s a bit of historical evil. People used to burn cats for fun.

[Slide 16] Why, according to the Free Will Theodicy, doesn’t God stop famines? Free Will Theodicy – She knows that it would be worse to violate our free will (by, say, forcing us to plant more food / charge fairer prices / donate more to charity) than to prevent the famine Herself. Quiz

[Slide 17] Unnecessary Evil Candidates War Disease (e.g. Tay-Sachs, Alzheimer's) Natural Disasters Animal suffering Genocide Sociopathy Torture Look again at our list of unnecessary evil candidates. A lot of them seem to stem from human choices – and so lots of them can be explained by the free will theodicy. (Worth noting, however, the free will theodicy doesn’t obviously explain all instances of suffering – though, the Swinburne reading for this week is an attempt to show that the Free Will theodicy covers more cases that one might initially suppose. It’s not obvious that we can explain Rowe’s fawn who burns to death in the forest or the badness of Alzheimer’s by pointing to the value of human freedom. When God is deciding whether to let someone get Alzheimer’s, it’s not clear that She is deciding whether to violate someone’s freedom. Surely God could prevent disease without literally STOPPING someone from making a choice – she could just wave her hand, and all the mis-folded proteins in the person’s brain would disappear, leaving that person none the wiser.)

[Slide 18] Putting Pressure on the Free Will Theodicy In what follows, I will try to push on the Free Will Theodicy to find out where it might be weak. As we push, we’ll find that the defender of this theodicy ends up having to say some (relatively) implausible things to maintain the argument. I’ll keep track of those.

[Slide 19] Consider the 600,000+ people murdered in the Soviet Purges. (I’ll show you 6 of them. Try to image 100,000X more)

[Slide 20] Vsevolod Meyerhold – theater director, actor. Tortured and executed, Feb. 1940.

[Slide 21] Nikolai Vavilov – botanist, geneticist. Died of starvation in prison, 1943.

[Slide 22] Isaac Babel – journalist, playwright, fiction writer. Executed, 1940.

[Slide 23] Osip Mandelshtam – poet, essayist. Died in a prison camp, 1938.

[Slide 24] Khadija Gayibova – pianist. Executed, 1938.

[Slide 25] Nikolai Nikolayevich Durnovo – linguist. Executed, 1937. That’s only 6 victims. Try to imagine 100,000X more. They;re “Crime” was that they represented, in some respect, a group or idea or activity that Josef Stalin didn’t like. That’s why they died.

[Slide 26] For each of these victims, God faced a choice, Preserve Stalin’s free will OR Save the life of an innocent According to the Free Will Theodicy , Everytime that choice came up, it turned out that as a matter of fact, Stalin’s freedom was more valuable. If we think the Free Will Theodicy is correct, This is what we have to say. But… really? Imagine the conversation with God when those 600,000 people made it to heaven. “I really am sorry that you were murdered. That was a great evil. But I think we can both agree that your life is worth less than Josef Stalin’s ability to freely choose to murder you.”

[Slide 27] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm. Again, we’re going to make a list of the troubling implications of the Free Will Theodicy, to get a sense for its costs . This our first troubling implication of the Free Will Theodicy. We seem to be committed to this claim but is it plausible?

[Slide 28] Back to Stalin. If the value of freedom lays in the struggle, Stalin’s freedom doesn’t seem very valuable. He was habitually choosing evil, making the same bad decisions day after day. Here’s a second worry about the Free Will Theodicy. That’s…. Weird. If I’m choosing something out of habit, I’m not struggling with it. Thus, we can’t point to the good of struggle when trying to explain why God allows habitual evil. But since God does allow people to be habitually evil, the Free Will Theodicy is going to have to affirm that those free choices are more valuable than the interests of the people who are harmed.

[Slide 29] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm. Freedom is of the utmost value even when a person habitually chooses evil. So here’s our next commitment. We really do need to say this is we’re going to endorse the Free WIll Theodicy as our reply to the Problem of Evil

[Slide 30] Consider Ted Bundy. Bundy killed at least 30 people between 1974 and 1978. He killed them because he enjoyed it. He enjoyed feeling in control of people, and causing them pain. This drive for domination led him to kill. That’s just how he was. On the other hand, I (and I assume you) have never killed anybody. Is this because my superior moral knowledge and self-control enable me to resist the impulses that Bundy could not? No. I don’t kill people mostly because I don’t have any impulse to. Hurting people is not pleasant for me. I don’t want to do the things Bundy did. That’s just how I am.

[Slide 31] Consider Ted Bundy. Bundy didn’t choose to be a sociopath You & I didn’t choose to be non-sociopaths So couldn’t God have given Bundy a better moral compass w/o violating his free will ? But then, if his character wasn’t something he chose, then surely God could fix his character without violating any free choices. He didn’t choose to be a sociopath! So there’s no conflict! There’s no obvious trade-off here between freedom and evil prevention. It looks like a win-win for God to just make Bundy a normal person with normal moral sentiments.

[Slide 32] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm. Freedom is of the utmost value even when a person habitually chooses evil. God can’t improve people’s moral compasses w/o making the world worse. So again, we have a troubling implicatoin.

[Slide 33] Back to Bundy. If Bundy lacks a moral compass, then why think his free choice of evil has value ? Recall the original justification for the Free Will Theodicy. The thought was that our free moral choices are only really valuable when we have grapple with evil. But Bundy doesn’t grapple with evil. That’s what it means to say he lacks a moral compass. He doesn’t feel the force of ethics, of basic human decency. So what value then has his free choice? THis is like the habitual choice problem but even worse. Bundy didn’t even struggle the first time. There was never a conflict! Why is that valuable? Why is that freedom worth more than 30 human lives?

[Slide 34] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm Freedom is of the utmost value even when a person habitually chooses evil. God can’t improve people’s moral compasses w/o making the world worse. Free will is valuable even if a person never feels the pull of choosing good … even if there’s no struggle.

[Slide 35] Back to Bundy. And couldn’t God prevent his bad choices from playing out w/o violating his freedom ? But it gets worse. First, it’s not obvious that God couldn’t make the world a better place by simply altering Bundy’s circumstances. God could have placed obstacles in such a way that Bundy simply never came across any potential victims. If he never has a convenient victim, he never chooses evil – and yet all his choices are still freely made.

[Slide 36] X freely chooses to do evil Moment 1 X does evil Moment 2 DIVINE INTERVENTION Second, it’s not even obvious (in this case or in other cases) that God really does face a trade-off between preserving our freedom and allowing evil. What’s wrong with this? Maybe God could step in at the very last instant, and say “Well, Ted, I see you’ve made your choice, you’ve exercised the freedom I’ve given you. Fine. That’s great! I love freedom. But I’m not going to stand by while you murder this person.” and then God would whisk the victim away. Freedom preserved! Evil prevented! The point being, it’s not at all obvious that God must violate our freedom in order to prevent wrongdoing. It seems like God could, in principle, step in between the free choice and the bad consequences.

[Slide 37] “NOT ON MY WATCH” This is the NOT ON MY WATCH God, and it’s not obvious that this God couldn’t mostly preserve our free will.

[Slide 38] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm Freedom is of the utmost value even when a person habitually chooses evil. God can’t improve people’s moral compasses w/o making the world worse. Free will is valuable even if a person never feels the pull of choosing good It’s always better to allow the bad consequences of evil choices play out

[Slide 39] Suppose you had the opportunity to stop an atrocity, to step in and block the choice. You should, right? That’s a good thing to do. Quiz Imagine that you have the opportunity to stop Stalin. Or that you have the chance to tie Ted Bundy up in your basement. If so, surely you’re required to do that? If you can stop mass murders from mass murderin’, you should! You can’t simply stand by and let people commit terrible atrocities. So, quiz question: Why is this observation a serious problem for the Free Will Theodicy ?

[Slide 40] Suppose you had the opportunity to stop an atrocity, to step in and block the choice. You should, right? That’s a good thing to do. But, then… why can’t God do the same? The trouble is that we don’t seem to value Bundy’s free will when it’s us humans deciding between preventing evil and preserving freedom. We think the value of Bundy’s freedom is tiny compared to the value of human lives. ( Should we put Bundy in jail and violate his freedom or let him roam free and commit murders – keep in mind his freedom is very valuable! Is not a serious question that people entertain. Jail him everyone agrees without hesitation.) So… uh… that’s weird. Which is it? Is it better to stop evil or is it better to preserve freedom? The Free Will Theodicy seems to tell us: Both! One standard applies to God (preserve freedom!) and another standard applies to humans (prevent evil) That’s very very strange.

[Slide 41] Commitments of the Free Will Theodicy It’s always better to preserve a person’s freedom than to prevent harm Freedom is of the utmost value even when a person habitually chooses evil. God can’t improve people’s moral compasses w/o making the world worse. Free will is valuable even if a person never feels the pull of choosing good It’s always better to allow the bad consequences of evil choices play out All of the above, only applies to God. Mostly the opposite is true of you & me. So this one last troubling implication of the Free Will Theodicy. So, the final question is just this, Considering all these claims together – all of these commitments we’d be making by endorsing the Free Will Theodicy – how attractive is this view? Next time we’ll look at one more theodicy: The soul-making theodicy.
