# PHIL 3600 - 15 - The Rationality of Faith

[Slide 1] The Rationality of Faith

[Slide 2] Review of the Anti-Faith Argument Public vs. private evidence Religious experiences as private evidence A reply to the Anti-Faith Argument

[Slide 3] Our beliefs partly determine our actions . This means our beliefs are not always morally innocuous . It can be positively bad to have bad beliefs . Recall, this was Clifford’s insight. It is morally important not only what we do but also what we believe.

[Slide 4] “It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence .” – William K. Clifford Here’s the lesson Clifford draws. (Notice this is pretty strong, a rather forceful statement of the view. We saw some reasons last time for thinking that we need to weaken this view in a few different places. It seems to get things wrong for junk facts and for beliefs that are necessary for achieving some good results (like your belief that your friend will successfully quit smoking).)

[Slide 5] P1) It is always, everywhere, and for anyone wrong to believe anything on the basis of insufficient evidence. P2) Given the conflicting evidence about the existence of God, any firm belief on this matter is based on insufficient evidence. C) It is wrong to positively believe or disbelieve in God. The Anti-faith Argument (generalized) Here’s the version of the Anti-Faith argument we closed with last time. This is a threat both to the theist and the atheist. Next time we’ll look at a more robust response to this concern. We’ll look at a defense of the rationality of faith.

[Slide 6] Can a religious person ever be rationally justified in believing in God? Can an atheist be rationally justified in her belief to the contrary? Is agnosticism the only reasonable reaction to our world? Put differently, these are our questions.

[Slide 7] Evidence

[Slide 8] First, a distinction: Some evidence is public evidence , which can be shared w/ other people. Some evidence is private evidence , which cannot directly be shared.

[Slide 9] Your evidence that Obama has hands VS My evidence that Obama has hands I’ve seen photos and video – in all of them he has hands. That’s public evidence! I can share those videos/photos with you! We can look at the same evidence.

[Slide 10] Your evidence that you have a headache VS My evidence that you have a headache Suppose you have a headache. How can you tell? You feel your headaching . That’s very good evidence! But notice, I can’t feel your headaching. I don’t have access to that evidence. At best, you can tell me that your headaches – but, notice, that evidence is different from (and less persuasive than ) your evidence. Your evidence is the feeling of your head aching . My evidence is your verbal report that your head aches.

[Slide 11] Your evidence that 94 × 7 = 658 vs My evidence that 94 × 7 = 658 Is this both? In one sense, it’s private since I can’t share my internal mental calculations with you. But we can share a written account of the calculation. You could write out the problem on a piece of paper and I could watch you complete it step by step, agreeing at each point along the way. So the paper is public evidence, even if the actual internal calculations are private

[Slide 12] You’re working late at a dead-end pizza job. You and a coworker are trying to close up. You toss all the un-purchased pizza into a trash bag then take it out back to the dumpster. In the dark alley behind the shop, you jump with surprise when you see a pair of arms reach out of the dumpster and catch the trash bag. Now consider a case.

[Slide 13] The arms, it turns out, are attached to world-famous actor Bill Murray. He emerges from the dumpster, fishes a slice of pizza out of the bag, and puts it in his mouth. Without a word, he saunters out of the alley. He glances back as he turns the corner and, through a mouthful of pepperoni, mouths the words, “No one will ever believe you.”

[Slide 14] Hick : Seemingly, you are justified in believing you just saw Bill Murray emerge from a dumpster.

[Slide 15] Hick : Seemingly, your friends are not justified in believing you just saw Bill Murray emerge from a dumpster.

[Slide 16] Why? Quiz

[Slide 17] Your evidence You saw, with your own eyes, Bill Murray emerge from the dumpster. Your friends’ evidence They were told by a friend that Bill Murray emerged from a dumpster. Your evidence is better than theirs, and that’s why it’s rational for you to believe and for them not to.

[Slide 18] If I have private evidence that you lack, then it may be rational for me to believe something, while being irrational for you to believe the same thing. Seemingly, then, this is the lesson to be drawn from this case.

[Slide 19] Evidence and God

[Slide 20] Is there public evidence for God? Yes, but it’s mixed. This was the point of our discussion about religious disagreement and this is one of the pivots upon which the Anti-Faith argument turns: The public evidence for God is not very good - or is, at best, very conflicted.

[Slide 21] Is there private evidence for God? Maybe! What might that look like? Quiz Probably that would look like religious experiences .

[Slide 22] Mysticism & Religious Experiences

[Slide 23] The philosopher William James is famous for his 1902, Varieties of Religious Experience , a lengthy attempt to catalog and describe mystical states . He points out that these experiences arise in all religious traditions and seem to share some core features.

[Slide 24] “ From the beginning, revelations take place in so flagrant a shape that the Sufis see before them, whilst wide awake, the angels and the souls of the prophets. They hear their voices and obtain their favors. Then the transport rises from the perception of forms and figures to a degree which escapes all expression, and which no man may seek to give an account of without his words involving sin… in the prophetic, the sight is illumined by a light which uncovers hidden things and objects which the intellect fails to reach… the transport which one attains by the method of the Sufis is like an immediate perception, as if one touched the objects with one's hand.” – Al-Ghazzali

[Slide 25] “I was alone upon the seashore as all these thoughts flowed over me, liberating and reconciling; and now again... I was impelled to kneel down, this time before the illimitable ocean, symbol of the Infinite. I felt that I prayed as I had never prayed before, and knew now what prayer really is… Earth, heaven, and sea resounded as in one vast world-encircling harmony. It was as if the chorus of all the great who had ever lived were about me. I felt myself one with them, and it appeared as if I heard their greeting: ‘Thou too belongest to the company of those who overcome.’” – Mawilda von Meysenbug

[Slide 26] James suggests that mystical, religious experiences tend to have in common, Ineffability (i.e. seem indescribable in words) Noetic quality (i.e. seem like true insights into reality) Transiency (i.e. tend to pass in a few minutes or hours) Passivity (i.e. seem “forced upon” the experiencer) … And again, such experiences are essentially universal. People of all faiths report having experiences like these, experiences that share these same core features.

[Slide 27] Mystical states , James observes, tend to be “absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come.” That is, by their very nature, these experiences tend to strike people as obviously true and real . James makes a few final and important observations about religious experiences or mystial states… To be clear, this is merely descriptive. James is just telling how people actually seem to behave. He’s not saying that they’re being rational. (nor is he saying they’re being irrational. ) He’s merely pointing out that people who have very clear religious experiences tend to insist that those experiences are accurate. The experiences themselves often come pre-packaged with a forceful sense of veridicality. (the experience itself seems to arrive screaming, I am real; I am true; this is reality laid bare. Again, that’s just a description of how people actually talk about these experiences and act.

[Slide 28] Why think that religious experiences are private evidence ? So, obviously, here’s the next question we should ask: Should we think of religious experiences as a kind of evidence? Do the people who have religious experiences have more evidence about religious matters than the rest of us?

[Slide 29] Let’s start with a non-religious case. Suppose you have a friend with a balloon fetish. One day, you’re both confronted with a balloon. She might say, “I’m having all the same perceptual experiences as you: I smell latex; I see a red, round thing. I hear it squeak when you rub it. BUT my experience also has an additional sexual component. I perceive the balloon as sexy. I can’t point to any particular part as the sexy part; I can’t show you how the balloon is sexy. I simply perceive it that way, and the best I can do is describe to you verbally what it’s like for me. Should you doubt that your friend is experiencing the balloon as sexy? Surely not. Why would they lie about that? You should believe, My friend is experiencing this balloon as sexy.

[Slide 30] Now compare that to this case: Suppose you and I go hiking. We arrive a magnificent natural vista and spend a few minutes in quiet contemplation. At one point, you turn to me and say, “I think I’m having a religious experience. It’s like… it’s like I can feel God’s presence her with us, surrounding us. I feel her love and comfort and peace.” “I can’t point to any particular part of this vista as the religious part; I can’t show you how this scene is religious. I simply perceive it that way, and the best I can do is describe to you verbally what it’s like for me.” Should you doubt that your friend’s experience includes a component that seems religious? Hick wants to say that, as in the balloon case, it doesn’t really make a lot of sense to doubt them. Why would they lie about that? You should believe, My friend is experiencing this scene as religious. They are having that experience. But is that experience evidence? Again, Hick wants to say yes . But only for that person. These experiences should be counted as a kind of private evidence – not really any different in kind than the feeling of a headache. It’s true that your friend can’t share their religious experience with you. But, then, neither can they share the aching of their head.

[Slide 31] Why think that religious experiences are private evidence ? Because they seem like genuine experiences for the experiencer – just ones that can’t be shared with others. So here’s what Hick wants to say. In the same way that the aching of my head feels real to me – even though I can’t directly prove to other people that my head aches – my mystical experiences of God may feel real to me – even though I can’t directly prove to other people that I’m really having a religious experience. And, just as I wouldn’t tell my friend, “It’s irrational for you to believe you have a genuine headache right now b/c your “evidence” isn’t publicly available bro” Hick wants to say, we shouldn’t tell our religious friend, “It’s irrational for you to believe you’re having a genuine religious experience b /c your “evidence” isn’t publicly available ”

[Slide 32] Where might religious experiences be found? What kinds of things are we looking for?

[Slide 33] A religious drug experience.

[Slide 34] A religious dream.

[Slide 35] “As [Saul] journeyed he came near Damascus, and suddenly a light shone around him from heaven. Then he fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting Me?” And he said, “Who are You, Lord?” Then the Lord said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting…”” – Acts 9:3-6 A literal vision or an auditory experience of God. Here’s one such described in the Bible

[Slide 36] In this case, the religious experience looks like a normal experience, but with an unexpected religious component . In that sense, it seems, any experience could in principle be a religious experience. Well, so what? What does this have to do with Clifford?

[Slide 37] Hick : The Anti-faith argument ignores the possibility that a theist might have powerful private evidence for God’s existence – i.e. she might have some powerful religious experiences to draw on. Here’s the punchline.

[Slide 38] Suppose you wake up one night to see this: An angle busting through your wall like the Kool-Aid Man and descending to relay to you a message from god. You slap yourself a few times to check you’re not still dreaming. Nope, there’s still an angel. You think back and confirm that you aren’t drunk or high. You know that you don’t have any history of hallucinations. As best you can tell, there’s just an honest to God angel in your room and a big hole in your wall.

[Slide 39] Hick: Seemingly, you are justified in believing you just saw an angel descend from heaven. Assuming you don’t have any reason to think you’re dreaming/high/hallucinating

[Slide 40] Seemingly, your friends are not justified in believing you just saw an angel descend from heaven. As in the Bill Murray case, They’re evidence is way way worse than yours. You SAW an angel bust into your bedroom. They only have your say-so.

[Slide 41] P1) It is always, everywhere, and for anyone wrong to believe anything on the basis of insufficient evidence. P2) Given the conflicting evidence about the existence of God, any firm belief on this matter is based on insufficient evidence. C) It is wrong to positively believe or disbelieve in God. The Anti-faith Argument (generalized) The possibility of religious experiences , then, gives us a way to respond to the Anti-Faith Argument! P2 is false, at least in cases where a person has more than just the standard public evidence for God’s existence.

[Slide 42] Hick: The Anti-Faith Argument falsely assumes that the public evidence for God is all the evidence there is. But some people may have sufficient private evidence for God.

[Slide 43] Maybe the lesson we should draw is this, Theism seems like a rational response to profound religious experiences. Because such experiences seem to count as private evidence . BUT… It must equally be true that agnostics (and atheists!) without religious experiences are responding rationally to the public evidence . (c.f. The Problem of Divine Hiddenness ) Why atheists? Why does this story change what we say about atheists? The atheist might rationally reason this way, “If God exists, She would want me to know that She exists and she would have the power to let me know! This is just the Problem of Divine Hiddenness. For me, then, the fact that I haven’t had any religious experiences seems itself to be some evidence against the existence of god. (That is, the fact that there are no religious experiences in my life is some private evidence that I have have that there are some unnecessary absences in the world. Which means, I have some private evidence that the Problem of Divine Hiddenness argument is sound. So I’m rationally justified in rejecting the 3-O God.)”
