# PHIL 1000 - 12 - The Rationality of Faith

[Slide 1] The Rationality of Faith

[Slide 2] Review of the Anti-Faith Argument Public vs. private evidence Religious experiences as private evidence A reply to the Anti-Faith Argument

[Slide 3] Our beliefs partly determine our actions. This means our beliefs are not always morally innocuous. It can be positively bad to have bad beliefs. Recall, this was Clifford’s insight. It is morally important not only what we do but also what we believe.

[Slide 4] “It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence .” – William K. Clifford Here’s the lesson Clifford draws. (Notice this is pretty strong, a rather forceful statement of the view.)

[Slide 5] P1) It is always, everywhere, and for anyone wrong to believe anything on the basis of insufficient evidence. P2) Given the conflicting evidence about the existence of God, any firm belief on this matter is based on insufficient evidence. C) It is wrong to positively believe or disbelieve in God. The Anti-faith Argument (generalized) Here’s the version of the Anti-Faith argument we closed with last time. This is a threat both to the theist and the atheist.

[Slide 6] Can a religious person ever be rationally justified in believing in God? Can an atheist be rational justified in her belief to the contrary?

[Slide 7] Is agnosticism the only reasonable reaction to our world?

[Slide 8] Evidence

[Slide 9] First, a distinction: Some evidence is public evidence , which can be shared among people. Some evidence is private evidence , which cannot directly be shared.

[Slide 10] Your evidence that Barack Obama has hands VS My evidence that Barack Obama has hands I’ve seen photos and video – in all of them he has hands. That’s public evidence! I can share those videos/photos with you! We can look at the same evidence.

[Slide 11] Your evidence that you have a headache VS My evidence that you have a headache Suppose you have a headache. How can you tell? You feel your headaching . That’s very good evidence! But notice, I can’t feel your headaching. I don’t have access to that evidence. At best, you can tell me that your headaches – but, notice, that evidence is different from (and less persuasive than ) your evidence, the feeling of your head aching .

[Slide 12] Your evidence that 94 × 7 = 658 VS My evidence that 94 × 7 = 658 Is this both? In one sense, it’s private since I can’t share my internal mental calculations with you. But we can share a written accout of the calculation. You could write out the problem on a piece of paper and I could watch you complete it step by step, agreeing at each point along the way. So the paper is public evidence, even if the actual internal calculations are private

[Slide 13] You’re working late at a dead-end pizza job. You and a coworker are trying to close up. You toss all the un-purchased pizza into a trash bag then take it out back to the dumpster. In the dark alley behind the shop, you jump with surprise when you see a pair of arms reach out of the dumpster and catch the trash bag. Now consider a case.

[Slide 14] The arms, it turns out, are attached to world-famous actor Bill Murray. He emerges from the dumpster, fishes a slice of pizza out of the bag, and puts it in his mouth. Without a word, he saunters out of the alley. He glances back as he turns the corner and, through a mouthful of pepperoni, mouths the words, “No one will ever believe you.”

[Slide 15] Hick : Seemingly, you are justified in believing you just saw Bill Murray emerge from a dumpster.

[Slide 16] Hick : Seemingly, your friends are not justified in believing you just saw Bill Murray emerge from a dumpster.

[Slide 17] Why? Quiz

[Slide 18] Your evidence You saw, with your own eyes, Bill Murray emerge from the dumpster. Your friends’ evidence They were told by a friend that Bill Murray emerged from a dumpster. Your evidence is better than theirs, and that’s why it’s rational for you to believe and for them not to.

[Slide 19] If I have private evidence that you lack, then it may be rational for me to believe something, while being irrational for you to believe the same thing. Seemingly, then, this is the lesson to be drawn from this case.

[Slide 20] Evidence and God

[Slide 21] Is there public evidence for God? Yes, but it’s mixed. We have, Religious texts (but they disagree – different religions say different things) Believer testimony (but they disagree – different believers insist that different religions are true) Arguments (but they disagree – some like the Ontological Arg seem to show that God exists, others like the Problem of Evil seem to show that She doesnt) This was the point of the Anti-Faith argument: The public evidence for God is not very good.

[Slide 22] Is there private evidence for God? Maybe! What might that look like? Quiz Probably that would look like religious experiences .

[Slide 23] Why think that religious experiences are private evidence ?

[Slide 24] Let’s start with a non-relgious case. Suppose you have a friend with a balloon fetish. One day, you’re both confronted with a balloon. She might say, “I’m having all the same perceptual experiences as you: I smell latex; I see a red, round thing. I hear it squeak when you rub it. BUT my experience also has an additional sexual component. I perceive the balloon as sexy. I can’t point to any particular part as the sexy part; I can’t show you how the balloon is sexy. I simply perceive it that way, and the best I can do is describe to you verbally what it’s like for me. Should you doubt that your friend is experiencing the balloon as sexy? Surely not. Why would they lie about that? You should believe, My friend is experiencing this balloon as sexy.

[Slide 25] Now compare that to this case: Suppose you and I go hiking. We arrive a magnificent natural vista and spend a few minutes in quiet contemplation. At one point, you turn to me and say, “I think I’m having a religious experience. It’s like… it’s like I can feel God’s presence her with us, surrounding us. I feel her love and comfort and peace.” “I can’t point to any particular part of this vista as the religious part; I can’t show you how this scene is religious. I simply perceive it that way, and the best I can do is describe to you verbally what it’s like for me.” Should you doubt that your friend’s experience includes a component that seems religious? Again, as in the balloon case, it doesnt’ really make a lot of sense to doubt them. Why would they lie about that? You should believe, My friend is experiencing this scene as religious.

[Slide 26] Why think that religious experiences are private evidence ? Because they seem like genuinely experiences for the experiencer just ones that can’t be shared with others. So here’s what Hick wants to say.

[Slide 27] Where might religious experiences be found? What kinds of things are we looking for?

[Slide 28] A religious drug experience.

[Slide 29] A religious dream.

[Slide 30] “As [Saul] journeyed he came near Damascus, and suddenly a light shone around him from heaven. Then he fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting Me?” And he said, “Who are You, Lord?” Then the Lord said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting…”” – Acts 9:3-6 A literal vision or an auditory experience of God. Here’s one such described in the Bible

[Slide 31] In this case, the religious experience looks like a normal experience, but with an unexpected religious component . In that sense, it seems, any experience could in principle be a religious experience.

[Slide 32] Hick : The Anti-faith argument ignores the possibility that a theist might have powerful private evidence for God’s existence – i.e. she might have some powerful religious experiences to draw on. Here’s the punchline.

[Slide 33] Suppose you wake up one night to see this: An angle busting through your wall and descending to relay to you message from god. You slap yourself a few times to check you’re not still dreaming; you aren’t drunk or high; you don’t have any history of hallucinations As best you can tell, there’s an honest to God angel in your room and a big hole in your wall.

[Slide 34] Seemingly, you are justified in believing you just saw an angel descend from heaven. Assuming you don’t have any reason to think you’re dreaming/high/hallucinating

[Slide 35] Seemingly, your friends are not justified in believing you just saw an angel descend from heaven. As in the Bill Murray case, They’re evidence is way way worse than yours. You SAW an angel bust into your bedroom. They only have your say-so.

[Slide 36] P1) It is always, everywhere, and for anyone wrong to believe anything on the basis of insufficient evidence. P2) Given the conflicting evidence about the existence of God, any firm belief on this matter is based on insufficient evidence. C) It is wrong to positively believe or disbelieve in God. The Anti-faith Argument (generalized) The possibility of religious experiences , then, gives us a way to respond to the Anti-Faith Argument! P2 is false, at least in cases where a person has more than just the standard public evidence for God’s existence.

[Slide 37] Hick: The Anti-Faith Argument falsely assumes that the public evidence for God is all the evidence there is.

[Slide 38] Maybe the lesson we should draw is this, Theism seems like a rational response to profound religious experiences. Because such experiences seem to count as private evidence . BUT… It must equally be true that agnostics (and atheists!) without religious experiences are responding rationally to the public evidence . Why atheists? Why does this story change what we say about atheists? The atheist might rationally reason this way, “If God exists, She would want me to know that She exists and she would have the power to let me know! Thus, The fact that I haven’t had any religious experiences seems itself to be some evidence against the existence of god. (because no religious experiences is more compatible with the the 3-O God does not exist hypothesis than with the the 3-o God does exist hypothesis.)

[Slide 39] “[On this view, the opposing] position must be accepted by the theist… for if it is reasonable for one man, on the basis of his distinctively religious experience, to affirm the reality of God, it must also be reasonable for another man, in the absence of any such experience, not to affirm the reality of God.” – John Hick I’ll give Hick the last word here. He writes,...
