# PHIL 3600 - 20 - Secular Ethics

[Slide 1] Secular Ethics test

[Slide 2] Background Defending secular ethics From the Lawmaker Argument From the Weirdness Argument Sidebar | Grounding One more defense of secular ethics Another indirect account

[Slide 3] What is the connection between God and ethics / morality ? … is ethics primarily a religious matter? … is God the source of morality – and, if so, in what sense? … and if there’s no God, does that mean there are no moral rules?

[Slide 4] A Direct Approach – Divine Command Theory (“ God willed the moral rules into being. ”) An Indirect Approach – Theory of Natural Law (“ God designed nature. Morality follows from Her design. ”) Theist : God is ultimately responsible for morality Obviously, the theist wants to say that morality comes from God. There are a variety of different ways to fill in that story. We’ve looked at two so far...

[Slide 5] Can we give a secular (i.e. non-religious) account of moral realism ? But h ere’s the question I want to consider today …

[Slide 6] Divine Dependence : objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them (i.e. moral facts can only arise from God’s will ) Can an atheist make sense of objective moral facts ? Recall, part of Divine Command theory was this idea that moral realism requires God, that the only way to make sense of non-relative, non-subjective moral facts is to say that God made them. So our question today is: Is that true? Can an atheist really not make sense of objective moral facts?

[Slide 7] Argument #1 – The Law maker Argument Argument #2 – The Weirdness Argument Argument #3 – The Motivation Argument Divine Dependence – objective moral facts can exist only if there’s a God to make them, only if they stem from God’s Will . Also recall, we got 3 different arguments from Craig for Divine Dependence. Each of these arguments gives independent support to this idea that Moral Realism can be true only if God makes it true.

[Slide 8] 3 Challenges for Secular Ethics (i) Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker ? (ii ) Isn’t morality too weird to exist without God? (iii) Isn’t God required to explain the force/importance of morality? So this, then, is the challenge before us. To make sense of moral realism w/o God, we’ll want to respond to all three of Craig’s arguments. Each is a challenge to the atheist, saying, You, the atheist, aren’t allowed to believe in objective moral facts unless you also believe in God. Thus, to defend a secular account of moral realism, we’ll need to answer these challenges.

[Slide 9] 3 Challenges for Secular Ethics (i) Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker ? So here’s the first challenge from Craig. (next slide)

[Slide 10] The Lawmaker Argument P1) All laws require a lawmaker (to write them / give them authority) P2) If Moral Realism is true, there are moral laws C) If Moral Realism is true, there is a moral lawmaker ( viz. God ) Recall the argument … What can the atheist moral realist say here? Well, we get one provocative response from Russ Shafer-Landau in the reading assigned for this module..

[Slide 11] “Objective laws – of the sort we find in mathematics, or astronomy, or hydrology – are not of our own creation. We have identified them and given them names, but we have not invented the truths that they represent. So in these cases [atheists already] have instances of laws without lawmakers …” He writes,

[Slide 12] “Who created the law of gravity? No one. Who made the second law of thermodynamics true? No one. If these laws are objective, then we certainly didn't create them. And if God doesn't exist, then, obviously, God didn't make them up, either. No one did.” – Russ Shafer-Landau

[Slide 13] Here’s the thought: Atheists already accept that the gravity exists and has authority over them. The behavior of gravity can be aptly captured in physical laws. And a theists already believe th at that law is objective (always and everywhere binding) while not believing in the existence of God. So: here’s a law but no lawmaker to write it or give it authority.

[Slide 14] Pythagoras’ Theorem is a law of triangles. Ath eists already accept this laws as real, as universally binding, as authoritative. Again, atheists already reject the claim that laws require lawmakers.

[Slide 15] Or consider M axwell’s Equations , which are laws governing the behavior of electro-magnetism in our universe. Same deal. The point is: If the atheist isn’t worried about believing in E&M while not believing in a lawmaker, she shouldn’t be any more worried about believing in morality

[Slide 16] The Lawmaker Argument P1) All laws require a lawmaker (to write them / give them authority) P2) If Moral Realism is true, there are moral laws C) If Moral Realism is true, there is a moral lawmaker ( viz. God ) Shafer-Landau is giving us an objection to P1. It’s just not true, he says, that all laws require lawmakers. Or, more precisely, his point is that all atheists already reject P1. Atheists are already happy to believe in universal laws of electromagnetism w/o a lawmaker, so they shouldn't balk at believing in universal laws of morality, just because there’s no lawmaker. And so The Lawmaker Argument, which is supposed to persuade atheists that God is required for morality, fails. No atheist is going to accept P1.

[Slide 17] 3 Challenges for Secular Ethics (i) Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker ? (ii ) Isn’t morality too weird to exist without God? So that’s a reply to the first challenge. Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker? Well, probably not. Let’s turn to the weirdness argument. Recall the move that Craig is making here.

[Slide 18] Q: Where do the moral facts come from? Divine Command Theorist : God. Atheist Moral Realist : Nowhere? He points out, if there are objective moral facts, we should want to be able to ask a variety about them, like...

[Slide 19] Q: How long have the moral rules existed? Divine Command Theorist : Since God created them Atheist Moral Realist : Always?

[Slide 20] Q: Why are the right things right , and the wrong things wrong ? Divine Command Theorist : B/c God says so Atheist Moral Realist : They just are?

[Slide 21] “ Moral values seem to exist as properties of persons, not as abstractions – or at any rate, I don't know what it is for a moral value to exist as an abstraction. [Atheists don’t have an] adequate foundation in reality for moral values, but just leave them floating in an unintelligible way.” – William Lane Craig Here’s Craig, summarizing the Weirdness Argument for Divine Dependence

[Slide 22] The Weirdness Argument If atheism is true, then there’s no adequate explanation for Moral Realism . Objective moral facts w/o God are simply too weir d to believe in. Here’s a terse summary of the argument.

[Slide 23] Reply – Moral laws are no weirder than scientific laws Quiz As before, the best reply to this challenge from Craig seems to be an appeal to things the atheist already accepts about the sciences. Quiz question: Can you see how that reply is going to go? Why would we think that scientific laws are just as weird as moral laws?

[Slide 24] The Law of Microscopic Reversibility (a law of c hemistry ) All chemical processes are reversible, although some processes have such a large energy bias that they don ’t, in practice, reverse themselves. Let me explain the thought. Here’s a law from chemistry. THis is a universal regularity that we’ve discovered in the world. A rule about chemicals that informed atheists accept and believe in...

[Slide 25] Now, we might note, chemicals haven’t always existed. For the first 300,000 years of the universe’s life after the Big Bang, there was too much concentrated energy in the universe for any subatomic particles to form stable atoms. Hence, for 300,000 years were no molecules. And so for 300,000 years, there was no Law of Microscopic Reversibility – or, perhaps, nothing for the law to apply to.,

[Slide 26] Q: Where do the chemistry facts come from? And, of course, we can ask all of Craig’s questions about the chemistry facts and chemistry rules in the early universe...

[Slide 27] Q: How long have the chemistry laws existed?

[Slide 28] Q: What were the laws doing before chemicals first emerged?

[Slide 29] “ Chemical laws seem to exist as properties of chemicals , not as abstractions – or at any rate, I don't know what it is for a law of chemistry to exist as an abstraction. [Atheists don’t have an] adequate foundation in reality for chemistry , but just leave the whole field floating in an unintelligible way.” Consider this variation of the Craig argument – this is literally just a find/replace, with “morality” swapped out for chemistry.

[Slide 30] The Weirdness Argument (chemistry edition!) If atheism is true, then there’s no adequate explanation for Chemistry . Objective chemistry facts w/o God are too weir d to believe in. So, by the exact same line of reasoning, we get this: ... (and obviously, there’s nothing special about chemistry. The same line of reasoning would undermine all of the hard sciences. If you don’t believe in God, you really can’t believe in the sciences. They’re unbelievably weird. ) All of that is to say: (next)

[Slide 31] The Point The laws of morality seem no more weird than the laws of chemistry . Morality is, at worst, believably weird. (as believably weird as chemistry, physics, etc.) … In other words, the atheist can (and, for consistency’s sake, should ) reject the claim that moral realism is too weird to be believed. There’s no extra weirdness involved in morality; it’s just same normal everyday weirdness we already see in the sciences, from other domains with abstract, universal rules. Of course, some theists may like that Weirdness argument I just satirically suggested, thinking, “Yes. I agree. Atheists aren’t allowed to be believe in science.” Which, sure, you can say that, but that misses the point. That’s like pointing at a poster of the periodic table and saying, “Chemistry exists; therefore, God. Checkmate atheists.” That argument is, shall we say, very very ungreat . That argument doesn’t say anything new or anything interesting to anyone. Atheists already know that chemistry exists. And they already know that denying the existence of God does require them to make sense of chemistry w/o appealing to the divine. That shit is all old news; it’s already priced in; it’s not changing minds and hearts And that’s precisely why it’s helpful for the atheist’s position to point out that the weirdnesses of morality are roughly the same as the weirdnesses of chemistry. It means that accepting the existence of objective moral facts doesn’t create much extra work for atheists. They were already gonna have to explain, like, the existence of chemistry laws in the early universe. And now it looks like they’ll be able to re-use that explanation (whatever it is) for moral laws.

[Slide 32] 3 Challenges for Secular Ethics (i) Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker ? (ii ) Isn’t morality too weird to exist without God? (iii) Isn’t God required to explain the force/importance of morality? Ok. Let’s look at the last challenge from Craig.

[Slide 33] “Let's suppose for the sake of argument that moral values just exist. How does that result in any moral obligations for me? Why would I have a moral duty, say, to be merciful? Who or what lays such an obligation on me? God makes sense of moral obligation because His commands constitute for us our moral duties.” – William Lane Craig

[Slide 34] The Motivation Argument If atheism is true, there’s no good reason to care about ethics . Moral Realism only makes sense if there’s a good reason to care abt ethics So, if atheism is true, moral realism doesn’t make sense. Last module, I’ll glossed the argument like this. That was for simplicity; I wanted to delay a conversation that we didn’t have time for. There’s a deeper concern here though. Let me state the concern, and then that will send us off on a detour for a bit – the detour I was avoiding last module

[Slide 35] The Grounding Argument If atheism is true, there is no ultimate or final explanation for why the moral facts are what they are; the moral facts are ungrounded . If the moral facts are ungrounded , moral realism is false. So, if atheism is true, moral realism is false. I submit, the deeper concern is about the source of morality, about which features of the world give rise to or ground moral facts.

[Slide 36] Sidebar | Grounding So, detour time. Let’s take a few minutes to get a handle on what the complaint is, exactly.

[Slide 37] Some things are more fundamental than other things. Let’s make some quick observations about how the universe is put together. First, this seems true:... The basic thought is, in other words, some things are more essential, basic, or foundational. Some things are holding up reality, are necessary and essential parts of less basic things.

[Slide 38] Keanu Reeves is more fundamental than a cardboard cutout of Keanu Reeves. Keanu exists first and independently of the cutout. The cutout exists only because Keanu does. Indeed, there’s a sense in which Keanu Reeves is more real than his cardboard cutout.

[Slide 39] Atoms are more fundamental than inflation. Both things are real, of course, (atoms do exist and so does inflation – prices do sometimes increase!), but atoms are more fundamental. Atoms are part of the basic building blocks of the universe. They are part of our universe’s fundament it’s basement it’s foundation. Inflation is not. Inflation is an emergent property of markets – which are themselves composes of products and people – which are made of chemicals – which are made of atoms.

[Slide 40] Some things are more fundamental than other things. The fundamental things give rise to the non-fundamental things. And here’s a related point… (indeed, that’s pretty much part of the meaning of calling something fundamental. )

[Slide 41] This is a diagram of a Folic acid molecule. Notice, the molecule is made up of at oms of Carbon, Nitrogen, Oxygen, and Hydrogen. Those atoms are more fundamental than the molecule and they give rise to the Folic Acid mole cule. The molecules are essential parts of the whole. There’s an important asymmetry here. Those Carbon and nitrogen atoms can exist w/o Folic acid but folic acid can’t exist without carbon and nitrogen.

[Slide 42] Similarly, your blood cells give rise to your blood. Hemoglobin is more fundamental than the blood it composes. There could be no blood without hemoglobin, but the reverse isn’t true.

[Slide 43] Some things are more fundamental than other things. The fundamental things give rise to the non-fundamental things. Less-fundamental things are grounded in more-fundamental things . One final point. Sometime, instead of using the “gives rise to” locution, philosophers will talk about grounding. Those two phrases are supposed to pick out the same relationship. To say that one thing grounds another is to say that the one gives rise to the other, supports the existence of the other.

[Slide 44] We’ve seen this example a couple times already this semester: We might say, for instance, that a pole grounds its shadow. The pole is more fundamental than its shadow AND t he pole gives rise to its shadow. The shadow exists because the pole exists. You can’t give any sort of ultimate explanation for the shadow without appealing to the pole

[Slide 45] { 1, 2, 7 ... The members ground the set. You can’t give any sort of ultimate explanation for the set without appealing to its members

[Slide 46] We can also talk about facts grounding other facts. For instance, facts about chemistry seem to ground facts about biology. For example, facts about the polarity of water molecules, the non-polarity of lipids, and the arrangement of phospholipids in a cell membrane ground and explain facts about the relative impermeability of cells

[Slide 47] Quiz What grounds the existence of the Midwest? Or, which more fundamental entities give rise to the entity, The Midwest … The states are more fundamental than the region AND the states give rise to the region You can’t give any sort of ultimate explanation for the existence of the Midwest without appealing to the individual states. Likewise, facts about the individual states in the Midwest ground facts about the midwest. (e.g. the fact that these states have continental climates grounds the fact that the midwest region has a continental climate)

[Slide 48] Back to Secular Ethics

[Slide 49] This seems to be the deeper Q that Craig is asking about morality , What grounds the moral facts? Which more fundamental things give rise to the moral things? What ultimately explains why the right things are right? … Craig thinks: the theist can answer these questions. The atheist can’t

[Slide 50] Divine Command Theory – r ightness is grounded in God’s preferences Theory of Natural Law – r ightness is grounded in natural functions Here’s are the theists’ answers

[Slide 51] Divine Command Theory – rightness is grounded in God’s preferences Theory of Natural Law – rightness is grounded in natural functions Secular Ethics – ??? But what can the atheist say? Can we make sense of moral realism, of the grounds of moral facts, without appealing either directly or indirectly to God?

[Slide 52] Reply – This seems backwards. If anything, DCT’s & TNL’s explanations are bad / unsatisfying. Here’s, I think, the atheist’s best reply…

[Slide 53] Suppose that the follow claim is an objective moral fact , t orturing innocent people for fun is wrong. Q: What’s the best explanation for that fact? What grounds it? (a) The fact that God dislikes torture (b) The fact that torture isn’t part of man’s natural function (c) The fact that torture victims have rights and can suffer (before advancing) To see the point, we’ll need to get into the moral realism mindset. (So if you aren’t already sympathetic with moral realism, try to pretend that you are for a bit.) Think about some moral claims that strike you as plausibly universally ture, and think about what the best, truest, and ultimate explanation is for those more claims. Here’s an example… Let me offer three different explanations... Hopefully you can see the problem. If we’re looking for satisfying explanations, the ones we’re getting from DCT and TNL are rather lacking. (at least, I find explanations a and b unsatisfying – and, judging from past experience, so do a lot of my students… though, certainly not all of them.)

[Slide 54] Suppose that the follow claim is an objective moral fact , denying civil liberties to people just b/c of their skin tone is wrong. Q: What’s the best explanation for that fact? What grounds it? (a) The fact that God dislikes racism (b) The fact that racism is unnatural (c) The fact that people have comparable rights and interests, irrespective of the color of their skin Here’s another example… Again, just ask yourself: which of these explanations is most satisfying? Seems like the best, deepest explanation for our proposed moral fact? I, personally, only feel the pull of (c). And, again, judging from past experience, I’m not alone in that.

[Slide 55] Suppose I wanted to convince you that, it’s immoral to allow teens under the age of 16 to watch porn. Q: Which of these arguments would you find most persuasive? (a) I show you that God hates it when young people watch porn (b) I show you that young people watching porn is unnatural (c) I show you that watching porn before age ~16 is consistently and profoundly detrimental to a person’s long term well-being Here’s a helpful variation on the same thought. Think about some moral issue that’s hard or at least new to contemporary society. Maybe digital porn. Think about what a persuasive argument would look like for this claim. What would I need to show you to convince you that this is true? (I’m not saying it is true! Just ask yourself what the best sort of evidence would be for its truth.) … As before, i personally really only feel the pull of (c). I don’t think the other two argument would actually persuade me. Like, suppose (a) and (c) came apart. Suppose it’s clear that God hates it when young people watch porn BUT it’s also clearly not harmful to them Or consider the opposite case. Suppose it’s clear that God doesn’t mind when young people watch porn BUT that it’s also clear that it’s super harmful in the long run In both cases, I myself am inclined to go with the harm facts. Insofar as I’m persuaded that it’s genuinely not harmful, then I’m inclined to think it’s morally ok – regardless of GOd’s attitudes. And insofar as I’m persuaded that it IS super harmful, then I’m inclined to think it morally isn’t ok – again, regardless of God’s attitudes. That suggests that we think harm considerations explain the moral facts better than God’s attitudes. Of course, it’s plausible, that (a) and (c) would never come apart, That God would never approve of something super harmful nor would God ever disapprove of something completely harmless. But notice: that’s basically the point Plato was making last module. God’s moral attitudes aren’t, we don’t think, random and arbitrary. Rather morality is grounded independently from God’s attitudes. And God merely noticing which things are right or wrong.

[Slide 56] Challenge #3 for Secular Ethics Do atheists have a way to explain what grounds the moral facts / what ultimately explains why the right things are right? Reply Yes. Do theists? If moral facts are grounded, surely they’re grounded in ( secular !) considerations about human rights, interests, & well-being. So. This is the reply I’m suggesting. The atheist should say... (And if pressed to give that explanation, the atheist may be able to say something like this:...)

[Slide 57] Here’s a possible story … Maybe morality is ultimately grounded in the fact that we each have a life that can go better or worse for us , in the fact that each of us has interests and desires and feelings, and in the fact that it’s bad for us when those things are ignored or thwarted and good for us when those things are attended to & promoted. Morality is simply a set of guidelines concerning how best to promote those important, good things . So, e.g., the reason why morality forbids slavery is precisely that slavery profoundly undermines the important interests of the ones enslaved. And the reason morality demands kindness is that kindness plays a consistent & important role in the promotion of other people’s interests. … The point is, the atheist seemingly can offer a satisfying, secular ethics – can give a robust explanation for where morality comes from, for its force and importance. Namely, People have interests and lives and well-being. People can suffer and can feel joy. All that stuff matters. That stuff can be the source of morality. (next)

[Slide 58] What’s the deep explanation for why you shouldn’t go outside when your sports team wins and shoot a gun into the air? It’s that you might kill some innocent bystander with rights and interests that matter. Facts about that person’s interests are what the moral fact that you shouldn’t fire your gun into the air in celebration.

[Slide 59] 3 Challenges for Secular Ethics (i) Don’t the moral laws require a lawmaker ? (ii ) Isn’t morality too weird to exist without God? (iii) Isn’t God required to explain the force/importance of morality? So… to summarize: Here were the three challenges we distilled from Craig’s article on Divine Command Theory. (and, recall, by “secular ethics” here, I mean a version of moral realism that’s compatible with atheism, where there are universal moral facts without a need, necessarily, for God.) We’ve seen one reply to each of these challenges. As ever and always, there’s a lot more to be said here. Other challenges, other replies, objections to our replise, etc. If you like this stuff, I recommend taking a metaethics course. ... For now though, I want to fill in a gap that I perceive in the Shafer-Landau piece I had you read for this module. Recall, our question in this module and the last is, What is the connection between God and morality? I want to talk about what that connection might look like, on this sort of view – where moral realism comes apart from God.

[Slide 60] Another Indirect Account

[Slide 61] What does God need to do to create the universe and everything in it? Like, what does that process look like? To get at the view, let’s start by considering this question...

[Slide 62] In Her Omniscience, God will notice , Sometimes by creating one sort of entity, She gets another sort of entity for free . Here’s one thing we might say about the process. Surely...

[Slide 63] Suppose God creates atoms . Does she also need to create molecules ? No — God gets those for free . Suppose God made the universe, matter, energy, and the laws of physics. Does she also need to separately create molecules? NO – she gets those for free

[Slide 64] Suppose God creates trees . Does she also need to create forests ? No — God gets those for free . Suppose God creates trees. Does she also need to create forests? NO – she gets those for free.

[Slide 65] Suppose God creates people . Does she also need to create rallies ? No — God gets those for free . Suppose God creates humans. Does she also and separately need to create political rallies, gatherings, and crowds ? NO – she gets those for free

[Slide 66] God, being an efficient worker, doesn’t need to create everything . She only needs to create the fundamental stuff. She gets everything else for free . Here’s one thing we might say about the process. Surely… This observation is potentially really useful for the theist who wants God to be the ultimate source of morality. Let me give you a silly example to illustrate why.

[Slide 67] Suppose God’s ultimate purpose for creating the universe was for there to be, Girl Scout Cookies … SPOILER that’s not true. But you know. Suppose. And suppose thatGod, being a consummate planner, makes a list of all the things She needs to make in order for her universe to be a place that churns out girl scout cookies every year.

[Slide 68] Laws of Physics Basic particles Molecules Stars Planets Basic organisms Humans LIST OF THINGS TO MAKE TO GET TH EM COOKIES Plants Agriculture Cooking Families Girls Girl Scouts Cookies Quiz Maybe something like this. [(read the list, quickly)] Now God’s no dummy. She knows that She can get a lot of this stuff for free. So quiz question: which things does she NOT need to personally create from this list– and why? What are some things from this list that will she get for free? … Probably, she doesn’t need to personally create planets. If she makes matter and gravity and set the laws of physics correctly, planets will form on their own. She’ll get those for free. And she doesn’t need to personally invent cooking, I don’t think. If she makes people and plants, she’ll get cooking for free. POssibly the same goes for everything on this list after the basic particles. (though, i’m less sure about basic organisms)

[Slide 69] Here’s the point... It seems open for the theist to say the same thing about morality, “ God created humans with well-being and interests and got morality for free . ” This still leaves God indirectly responsible for morality.

[Slide 70] A Direct Approach – Divine Command Theory (“ God willed the moral rules into being. ”) An Indirect Approach – Theory of Natural Law (“ God designed nature. Morality follows from Her design. ”) An Indirect Approach – Secular Ethics (“ God created beings with interests. She got morality for free. ”) Theist : God is ultimately responsible for morality This, I think, is the gap left in the Shafer-Landau article. Recall, the theist wants to say that God is ultimately responsible for morality. My point is that the secular approach we’ve been considered heretofore very much does seem compatible with that view. To say that ethics is grounded in human interests is not necessarily to push God out of the picture! The theist can, instead, make room for God as the direct creator of the universes basic building blocks and the indirect creator of anything that those building blocks naturally give rise to on their own. ALright. SO this concludes our 2-module discussion of God morality. Our final topic, for the next two modules, is death.
