# PHIL 1000 - 02 - The Ontological Argument

[Slide 1] The Ontological Argument

[Slide 2] Unit Overview Ingredients for the Ontological Argument Two distinctions : Possible vs. impossible beings, actual vs. possible beings Definition: God Definition: Great-making properties The Ontological Argument

[Slide 3] Unit 1 – Metaphysics: God, Evil, and the Afterlife Week 1: The Ontological Argument Week 2: The Fine-tuning Argument Week 3: The Problem of Evil Week 4: Personal Identity and the Afterlife

[Slide 4] The Ontological Argument was first suggested by Saint Anselm of Canterbury (1033 - 1109 C.E.) He argues that God’s very properties entail that She must exist – i.e. it’s incoherent to imagine God as non-existent.

[Slide 5] Two Distinctions

[Slide 6] Things that actually exist Things that don’t exist Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Imagine a line. On one side are things which do actually exist. On the other are things which do not actually exist.

[Slide 7] Things that actually exist Things that don’t exist Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs For most of the things, on both sides of the line, it is not difficult to imagine that they might have been on the opposite side. Whales exist, but it is no strain to imagine a world where they do not. Likewise with centaurs: they do not exist, but it is not hard to imagine them in a world like ours.

[Slide 8] Things that actually exist Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs There are a few things, though, on the Does Not Exist side of the line that seem to belong there of necessity. That is, there are some non-existent things that we cannot imagine as real. Let’s draw another line to separate these off from the possible non-existents.

[Slide 9] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t Let’s give these three categories some names. (Not very creative names, but Names anyway) One more important point: everything belongs somewhere on this chart. This chart is exhaustive

[Slide 10] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t Let’s give these three categories some names. (Not very creative names, but Names anyway) One more important point: everything belongs somewhere on this chart. This chart is exhaustive

[Slide 11] Possible things A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Impossible things Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Using these categories we can describe two important distinctions. First, there is an important distinction between Possible Things and Impossible Things ... Everything in Cat 1 and Cat 2 is possible. Those beings are coherent and imaginable . Some of them are real (like Will Smith) and some of them are not (like centaurs) but they’re all possible and coherent. Cat 3, on the other hand, is full of impossible things things are straight up incoherent and unimaginable.

[Slide 12] Real things A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Not real things Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs The second important distinction is between Category 1 (containing all the REAL THINGS, which actually exist in our world) and the other 2 categories, which are full of things that don’t exist. QUIZ QUESTION: Multiple choice: Which of these belongs in Cat 2: (a) Florida (b) The smallest positive number (c) Harry Potter (d) Man buns

[Slide 13] Real things A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Not real things Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs Quiz QUIZ QUESTION: Which of these belongs in Cat 2: (a) Florida (b) The smallest positive number (c) Harry Potter (d) Man buns

[Slide 14] Defining God

[Slide 15] Does God exist? So keep in mind: we’re searching of an answer to this question. There are a couple ways we could go about our search. 1) We could start by looking around at stuff and try to see if anything looks promising as a God-candidates. (“Guys, I’ve found something but I’m not sure it’s God.”) 2) We could start by specifying in detail what God must be like and ONLY THEN going out to look at things, to see if there’s anything like that. I submit to you: Method 1 is not very efficient. Suppose for instance that I have it in mind vaguely that God is awesome.

[Slide 16] God? So I go out into the world and start looking for awesome things. I notice: Tiger Woods is awesome… is he god?

[Slide 17] God? ALSO Ice cream cake is awesome. Is ice cream cake God?

[Slide 18] God? ALSO this Chinese water deed is kinda awesome… Is it God? Notice: We CAN in each case give good reasons why each thing isn’t God. But what do those reasons amount to? It seems like we’re going to argue that each of these being isn’t God because it lacks certain properties that we think God should have. Chinese water deer are too stupid to be God. They aren’t sufficiently “God-like.” But what does that mean “God-like”? What is God like? Intelligent, apparently – at least, smarter than deer. What else, though? Maybe we should talk about that first before we go wandering around in the world point at cake.

[Slide 19] Let’s first agree on a description of God , then we can ask, “ Is there anything like that? ” Here’s a proposal.

[Slide 20] The Greatest Being God God is the greatest possible being – the being than which none greater can be conceived . Here’s the definition that we’ll be working with today. 3 points need to made here. By “great”, we mean “better” or “more admirable” or “more perfect” – God is the perfectest being. Also bear in mind that what’s relevant here is possibility, rather than actuality. So the class of things than which God is greater is all the possible things; all the things not in category 3, in other words. I cannot stress this enough: This is NOT THE ONLY POSSIBLE WAY OF UNDERSTANDING GOD. I am not claiming that this is THE definition of God. I am not claiming this is the best definition of God. Rather, this is how we’ll define God for the purposes of the Ontological Argument . This is what St. Anselm has in mind when he says ‘God’. When Anselm says ‘God exists’, he means ‘the greatest possible being exists.’ A s we’ll see in future lectrues, there are other good ways of defining God that are genuinely distinct from this definition. Other people might say ‘God exists’ and mean something like, ‘there was a powerful being who created our universe – that being exists.’

[Slide 21] Possible things A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Impossible things Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs God is better than all this stuff. Ok so: For today, we’re thinking of God as the greatest possible being. To put this in terms of our earlier categories, what that means is...

[Slide 22] God? Quiz We can use this definition to explain why Tiger Woods isn’t God. <QUIZ QUESTION – open-ended answer> A: We can imagine a being greater than Tiger. Call him Super-Tiger, he: 1. wouldn’t lose all the time. 2. wouldn’t commit adultery. 3. Other stuff.

[Slide 23] Great-making Properties

[Slide 24] Let’s define a great-making property as follows, a great-making property is such that when we consider adding this property to a being which lacks it, we invariably make that being greater. By “great” here, we mean something very generic like “more admirable” or “more valuable” or “improved” Thus, we could also describe a great-making property is a property that is always an improvement, always an upgrade when you add that property to beings which lack it. I know that’s a bit telescopic, so we’ll look at some examples.

[Slide 25] Is greenness a great-making property ? Greenness is a property. Some objects are green; they ahve this property. Other objects are not green; they lack this property.

[Slide 26] Is greenness a great-making property ? Imagine a chunk of gray basalt. Would it be greater if it were green? Seemingly not.

[Slide 27] Is greenness a great-making property ? Or imagine ketchup – is it greater when it’s green?

[Slide 28] Is greenness a great-making property ? No . If anything we’ve made it worse. Revolting stuff. Since adding greennes to a being doesn’t necessarily make it greater, greenness is not a great-making property.

[Slide 29] Is kindness a great-making property ?

[Slide 30] Is kindness a great-making property ? Imagine something that’s unkind – like Martin Shkreli. (He famously grabbed up the patent for an important anti-parasite drug and then raised prices by over 5000%.) He’s not kind right now. But imagine giving him the property of kindness . We asking, Is he greater now? It seems like it to me! It seems to make Martin Shkreli genuinely better

[Slide 31] Is kindness a great-making property ? Of course, we don’t ahve to restrict ourselves to actual things. Great-making properties are suppose to improve all beings which lack them – not just the real ones. So think about Severus Snape. He’s a douche. Isn’t he greater when we imagine adding the property of kindness to him?

[Slide 32] Is kindness a great-making property ? You might be wondering, “What about ketchup again? Surely kind ketchup is no better than regular ketchup? And if that’s right, doesn’t that mean kindness isn’t great-making? Because it doesn’t always make things greater?” That’s an interesting case. Here’s what I think we should say. When we imagine adding the property of kindness to ketchup… we fail. The thing that we imagine is just plain old ketchup. It doesn’t do anything on it’s own, so it doesn’t do any kind or mean things. Since we aren’t actually imagining kind ketchup, it’s not the case that we’re imagining kind ketchup as no greater than plain ketchup. (COMPARE: Imagine there was a walkin, talking bottle of ketchup who’s kind of of douche. Now it seems like we CAN imagine a version of that ketchup who’s kind. But, then, doesn’t it also seem like the kind ketchup-man is better than the unkind one?)

[Slide 33] Is kindness a great-making property ? Almost certainly. (I haven’t proven this. There could be some counter-example cases that I’m simply overlooking. Nevertheless it seems v plausible to me.)

[Slide 34] Is physical strength a great-making property ? No . Quiz Remember the question is this: Does adding physical strength to a being ALWAYS AND EVERY TIME mark an improvement? Imagine a cat, Tibbles, who likes to knock things down off of other things. (e.g. your glasses off the table) Now imagine him SUPER STRONG. So strong he easily knocks, idk, your house off its foundation. Surely Tibbles is not greater as a strong thing. Or imagine an evil robot – Mecha-Hitler – who is physically very weak. V killable. Now imagine that same robot but very very strong. Surely Mecha-Hitler is not greater as a strong thing.

[Slide 35] Is wisdom a great-making property ? Maybe? Quiz Not sure what to say about this one. Anselm thinks it’s clear that wisdom is great-making. But what about, like, a serial killer? Does adding wisdom to a serial killer make him better ? Idk.

[Slide 36] One last idea

[Slide 37] For Anselm, existence is a great-making property . Let me offer you a few examples to try to make this sound plausible.

[Slide 38] Consider Superman. He’s pretty cool but he’s not real. Wouldn’t Superman be greater if he had the property “actually exists”? Superman+ (the one who’s real) is greater than Superman (the one who’s not)

[Slide 39] Consider a pegasus. Wouldn’t a pegasus be greater if he had the property “actually exists”? Pegasus+ (the one who’s real) is greater than Pegasus (the one who’s not)

[Slide 40] Consider a hot and fresh pizza sitting right now on your kitchen counter. Wouldn’t that pizza be greater if he had the property “actually exists”? (i.e. actually is right now sitting on your kitchen counter)

[Slide 41] For Anselm, existence is a great-making property . Anselm thinks this is true. It’s a provocative idea, and it’s one that, we’ll see in a second, plays a key role in the Ontological Argument.

[Slide 42] The Ontological Argument (finally)

[Slide 43] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. The Ontological Argument

[Slide 44] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor God? Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales God? Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs God? Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t

[Slide 45] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) The Ontological Argument

[Slide 46] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor God Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales God? Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs God? Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t

[Slide 47] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument What happens next is exactly what you expect: Anselm argues that God is not in Category 2 either. On P3) to be in Cat 2 is to be a possible thing that could exist but doesn’t actually exist. Centaurs are Cat 2. They could exist but don’t actually. That’s true by definition of all Cat 2 beings. On P5): You can think of this as the claim the God is unimprovable : he’s the greatest possible being so he must already be at peak performance, perfect in every way, completely and utterly unimprovable.

[Slide 48] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor God Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales God Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs God Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t Visually, here’s how the argument works.

[Slide 49] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument Quiz QUIZ QUESTION: Which of these best characterizes your present reaction to the Ontological Argument: (a) I’m lost. What just happened? (b) Cool argument. (c) That’s messed up. (d) Seems right to me. (e) I don’t care about this.
