# PHIL 3600 - 11 - Divine Hiddenness

[Slide 1] Divine Hiddenness

[Slide 2] On divine absences and love An analogy to maternal hiddenness Evidence for divine absences Formalizing the Argument Parallels to the Problem of Evil Some bad responses

[Slide 3] It is not uncommon for theists, especially in times of distress, to report feeling a sense of divine absence . This experience can be acutely painful. So well known is this phenomenon that it explicitly described and explained in the Catechism of the Catholic Church – they call it desolation or spiritual dryness. (Catholics are hardly alone in experiencing this phenomenon! But they have been very active in describing and discussing it)

[Slide 4] “ In the darkness . . . Lord, my God, who am I that you should forsake me? The child of your love — and now become as the most hated one. The one — you have thrown away as unwanted — unloved. I call, I cling, I want, and there is no one to answer . . . Where I try to raise my thoughts to heaven, there is such convicting emptiness that those very thoughts return like sharp knives and hurt my very soul. Love — the word — it brings nothing. I am told God lives in me — and yet the reality of darkness and coldness and emptiness is so great that nothing touches my soul. ” – Mother Teresa Mother Teresa famously spent large portions of her life feeling this way.

[Slide 5] “ I did not know that love could make one suffer so much… of pain human but caused by the divine. The more I want him, the less I am wanted. I want to love him as he has not been loved, and yet there is that separation, that terrible emptiness, that feeling of absence of God. They say people in hell suffer eternal pain because of the loss of God . . . In my soul I feel just this terrible pain of loss, of God not wanting me, of God not being God, of God not really existing. ” – John of the Cross The 16th Century Spanish priest John of the Cross is also famous for writing about this wrenching feeling of divine absence.

[Slide 6] This phenomenon – the anguishing sense of divine absence – is surprising . Specifically, it’s surprising for a God that loves us to inflict anguish thru absence . … Of course, a surprising thing is just an unexpected thing. So to make sense of why this is surprising, we need to talk through our expectations. What should we expect from God, given that She loves us? And, first, what do we even mean when we say that God loves us?

[Slide 7] ‘ Love ’ picks out a particular bundle of attitudes & emotions that humans are capable of feeling for other beings. (not just any bundle – the BEST bundle!) Love is the often thought to be the highest aspiration of our emotional lives.

[Slide 8] When we say, “God loves us” We mean , God feels about us the same way we feel about our most cherished companions . (though, God’s love is maybe stronger than ours.) ... That’s important. God’s love is supposed to be, essentially, the same feeling as OUR love. We don’t use scare-quotes when we say that God “loves” us. It’s not supposed to be a metaphor or a gross oversimplification. It’s not as though God is feeling something completely alien and un-human towards us, a feeling we can only crudely approximate with the word ‘love’. No. God loves like we love – though, probably even better. Indeed, the story we get (at least from Abrahamic religions) is that god made us in Her image. Love was her feeling first, and she made us in such a way that we’re capable of that feeling too.

[Slide 9] If someone feels love toward you, then the following things are true of them: As I said, it seems like love is a bundle of characteristic attitudes and emotions. But we can obviously be a lot more specific than that. ...

[Slide 10] They earnestly want your life to go well for you and are distressed at your setbacks.

[Slide 11] They want to spare you from pain and distress wherever possible.

[Slide 12] They want you to see them as they really are.

[Slide 13] They want to interact with you, personally, a great deal.

[Slide 14] They miss that personal interaction when it is absent.

[Slide 15] When we say, “God loves us” We imply , God wants our lives to go well for us God wants to spare us pain and distress God want us to know Her as She really is God wants personal interaction with us God misses that interaction when absent All of these things are true of real human love. And since God’s love is supposed to be experiencing the very same feeling, presumably all these things are true of God’s love for us.

[Slide 16] A case of maternal hiddenness To get a handle on divine hiddenness, I think, it’s easiest to look at an analogous case between humans. So let’s look at a case of maternal hiddenness, a case where a mother is surprisingly absent

[Slide 17] Imagine that you come across a child in a dark forest. He’s alone and clearly terrified, calling out repeatedly for his mother. You ask him what the matter is and if you can help. “I need to find my mother, so we can leave the forest before dark,” he says. “She’s here in the forest with you?” you ask. “Yeah. She’s really close. I’m sure she can hear me.” he says. You ask the boy why his mother hasn't already come for him, if she's close by. “Do you think she’s hurt or detained somehow? Or lost, like you?" You ask. “No,” he says. “She’s fine. She could come get me if she wanted.” The boy’s assurance strikes you as odd and unsettling. You ask cautiously, “Do you… think your mother has left you here intentionally?... Does your mother ever mistreat you?" "No!” The boy is angry. “She’s loves me very very very much. She loves me more than anything.” You think you might have missed something. “So… your mother can hear you… and she could come save you if she wanted… and she loves you dearly?” The boy nods. “I don’t understand." you say. "If all that’s true, then why hasn’t she come for you?” The boy just shrugs. “Dunno.” He turns away and begins calling out for his mother again.

[Slide 18] If the child’s mother loves him , surely, She wants his life to go well for him She wants to spare him pain and distress She want him to know her as she really is She wants personal interaction with him She misses that interaction when absent If the child’s mother loves him , ( and if she knows about his needs & can help) it is very surprising that she’s absent . …

[Slide 19] If the child’s mother loves him , surely, She wants his life to go well for him She wants to spare him pain and distress She want him to know her as she really is She wants personal interaction with him She misses that interaction when absent If the child’s mother loves him , ( and if she knows about his needs & can help) it is very surprising that she’s absent . Quiz Hopefully you can see where this is going. Quiz question, Why does this case seem to give rise to an argument against the existence of the 3-O God?

[Slide 20] If God loves us , surely, God wants our lives to go well for us God wants to spare us pain and distress God want us to know Her as She really is God wants personal interaction with us God misses that interaction when absent If God loves us , it is very surprising that She’s absent . Hopefully you can see, all of this seems to apply equally (or moreso) to God. … This is the Problem of Divine Hiddenness. The phrase “very surprising” is doing the same thing here that it was in the Problem of Evil lecture. The point is: If we really believe that the 3-O God exists, then we simply would not expect the world to look the way that it does.

[Slide 21] Evidence for absence We’ll formalize that argument in a bit, but for now I want to point to some cases of divine absence, to give you a better sense for what the concern is supposed to be.

[Slide 22] The faithful often seek out God for comfort, companionship, or understanding – but come up empty. As I pointed out a few minutes ago, this is a very well-documented phenomenon. Lots of theists report experiencing this at some point in their religious lives. They earnestly reach for some connection to God, some shred of her presence and love, and they find nothing. If God is perfectly loving, that is very puzzling. That absence cries out for explanation. Why is God not more present?

[Slide 23] Some people die have never even conceived of God – never having the opportunity to develop a relationship. Whatever religion you believe in, it’s inevitably going to turn out that some isolated societies (whether today or in history) simply never have contact with divine revelation. They didn’t themselve receive any prophets from God, nor did any apostles from other societies ever visit them. Of course, almost all societies have some sort of religion, but lots of those religions are quite radically dissimilar to the modern Abrahamic ones. A society who believes in a mean-spirited and vengeful pantheon does really have a chance to know the 3-O God. These people apparently, never had the chance to know God, to enter into a relationship with her. Almost certainly, this is true of hundreds of thousands if not millions of people, throughout history. If God is perfectly loving, that is very puzzling. That absence cries out for explanation. Why is God not more present?

[Slide 24] Some people die have never even conceived of God – never having the opportunity to develop a relationship. Or imagine a 5 year old who dies of leukemia but whose parents are atheists and so never took her to church or introduced her to religious teachings about God. That child dies having never had the opportunity to know God, to know that she is loved by God. (Compare: the child does know that her human parents love her! Her parents do a good job expressing and communicating their love. But God doesn’t. The child dies never even realizing that God exists.) Again, If God is perfectly loving, that is very puzzling. That is to say: surely something like this has happened at least once in our world – and probably thousands upon thousands upon thousands of times. Those divine absences demand anexplanation. Why is God not more present?

[Slide 25] Some people are non-resistant non-believers. They’re open to believing in God, but never find her. Imagine a student who showed up to this class just completely unsure whether God exists or not. First we talk about arguments for the existence of God. Maybe she finds the Fine-Tuning Argument kinda moving. She’s leaning toward theism. But then we hit the Problem of Evil, and she decides, the 3-O God doesn’t exist. Surely this happened thousands upon thousands of times. (Not in my class in particular. I haven’t had that many students and I’m probably not all that persuasive. But still: among all the college students who’ve ever taken a Philosophy of Religion course like this one: surely thousands have been turned away from God. That has to happen , sometimes. Again, If God is perfectly loving, that is very puzzling. That absence cries out for explanation. Why is God not more present? Why does God allow people like that to be pushed away, for lack of evidence?

[Slide 26] Some theists ultimately convert to atheism , in the absence of a sense of God’s presentness in their lives. This, in particular, is so weird. These people were already in a relationship with God; many of them must have been very willing to continuing that relationship . But God allows them to drift away from the faith. Many of these people are simply so struck by the utter lack of evidence for God in their lives, that they turn away from religion. Again, If God is perfectly loving, that is very puzzling. That absence cries out for explanation. Why is God not more present? Why does God allow people like that to be pushed away, for lack of evidence?

[Slide 27] Formalizing the Argument

[Slide 28] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary absence . (b/c God loves us, knows about our needs, wants what’s best for us, and has the power to be with us.) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary divine absence . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Divine Hiddenness As it happens, the easiest way to formalize the argument from divine hiddenness is to mirror our original reasoning from the problem of evil. We point out in P1) that we expect certain things to be true of our world, if there is a loving 3-O God: Given God’s nature, it seems impossible for the 3-O God to exist and for the world to contain unnecessary absences . We then point out in P2) that it sure does look like God has been unnecessarily absent at least once.

[Slide 29] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary absence . (b/c God loves us, knows about our needs, wants what’s best for us, and has the power to be with us.) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary divine absence . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Divine Hiddenness Possible Responses: Reject P1 Reject P2 Accept C From this point forward, the dialectic is pretty much perfectly isomorphic to the problem of evil. As before, the theist has 3 options… As before, basically no one tries to argue that unnecessary divine absences are to be expected from a 3-O God. Nor do any theists want to accept the conclusion.

[Slide 30] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary absence . (b/c God loves us, knows about our needs, wants what’s best for us, and has the power to be with us.) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary divine absence . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Divine Hiddenness Possible Responses: Reject P1 Reject P2 Accept C Preferred theist option Thus, as before, we’re left with Option 2: we have to find a way to reject P2. We must argue, There has never been – not even once – an instance of unnecessary divine absence.

[Slide 31] Some kinds of absences are necessary . The Problem of Divine Hiddenness is about unnecessary absences . Absences are unnecessary when they, (a) don’t prevent some greater bad AND ALSO (b) don’t secure some greater good. As before, we’re drawing a distinction here between necessary absences and unnecessary absences...

[Slide 32] An evil dictator is building a new extermination camp for his political enemies. He believes he’s doing God’s work, and he prays to God for guidance on where to locate the extermination camp. God gives no response. This is an instance of hiddenness. There is an earnest attempt by the dictator to find God, and God is nowhere to be found. This is a case of divine absence – b ut, hopefully you can see, this case is easy for the theist to deal with. This case is presumably not good evidence against the 3-O God b/c the theist can tell a plausible story according to which God’s absence is necessary, is needed to prevent some greater evil. Maybe, e.g., we can say: God doesn’t respond to the dictator b/c God doesn’t want to endorse the extermination camp. And, perhaps, when the dictator doesn’t hear anything from God, he will be able to infer that God doesn’t want him to build an extermination camp at all. Thus: God is not just hiding; She is withholding her approval. (Just as a loving mother might in the same situation!)

[Slide 33] A young woman has procrastinated writing a paper for months. It’s due tomorrow, and she hasn’t even read the book she’s supposed to write about. She prays to God for aid and comfort and finds none. Here’s another case of divine hiddenness. There is an earnest attempt by the young woman to find God, and God is nowhere to be found. But this case too is pretty easy for the theist to deal with: it’s not hard to tell a plausible story according to which God’s absence is needed to prevent some greater evil. Maybe we say, God wants this young woman to learn from her mistake and to be more assiduous in future. But in order for her to learn from her mistake, the mistake needs to hurt at least a little bit. That’s why God is withholding her comfort – just as a loving mother might in the same situation.

[Slide 34] A theist and an atheist are arguing about God’s existence. The atheist says, “ God, if you’re out there, come down here and make yourself manifest to us. ” Nothing happens. Quiz Here’s another case of divine hiddenness. The question is, Does this seem like a necessary absence or like an unnecessary absence? You take a shot at this one: how might we explain this instance of divine hiddenness as necessary ? … We might say something like this: There are lots of good reasons for God to refuse this request. First, God might not want the atheist to think of Her as some sort of display piece or servant to be commanded about. God might not want people to believe in Her merely because She appears when commanded to. God might think that the atheist isn’t arguing in good faith and that it would be better for this person to find God at another time, when they’re feeling less combative.

[Slide 35] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary absence . (b/c God loves us, knows about our needs, wants what’s best for us, and has the power to be with us.) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary divine absence . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Divine Hiddenness Possible Responses: Reject P1 Reject P2 Accept C Preferred theist option But again those are easy cases. As before, the real challenge is for the theist to tell some sort of story according to which ALL divine absences might be understood as necessary, as needing for stopping some greater evil or preventing some greater good.

[Slide 36] Unnecessary Absence Candidates Theists feeling anguish w/o God Societies that never imagine a 3-O God Children who die w/o knowing God Agnostics convinced by atheistic args Theists who convert to atheism Here’s our short list of really tough cases. We have:... The theists task is, once again, to try to tell some story (or a collection of stories) according to which all of those absences might count as necessary – as important decisions that God is making to prevent greater evils or provide greater goods. As we did with the problem of evil, I want to quickly canvas a few of the bad responses that you most often hear from people

[Slide 37] Most people are closed off to the possibility of finding God. A lot of people’s first reaction is this:... And yeah. Sure. That’s true of some people. But notice, we didn’t even include people who are militant atheists on our list of divine absences that need to be explained. Those are easy for the theist to explain! They didn’t even make the short list. But this explanation seems pretty worthless for the items we actually did include on our shortlist. (theists who feel desolate without God, entire cultures who never receive divine revelation, children who die never even thinking there might be a God, etc.) It’s obviously not going to work to simply say, “Oh that five year old with terminal cancer? Yeah, she was just too closed off to have a relationship with God. So close minded, that 5 year old. And anyway she’s dead now! Nothing to be done!”

[Slide 38] God is never absent . It’s just necessary for Her to hide. … But this reply simply pushes the question back a step. Instead of ‘why so absent,’ now it’s ‘why so hard to find.’ It’s not obvious that question is any better. Put differently, this response doesn’t seem to actually help us at all. This merely asserts that God’s absences are necessary. But what’s needed is an explanation for why those absences are necessary.

[Slide 39] All hiddenness is a necessary part of God’s plan Finally... Well, yes. Any solution to the problem will take this form. But notice the analogy with the problem of evil. The trick is to explain, in terms we can understand, why a good plan would involve hiddenness. Because from where we’re standing, it sure does look like a garbage plan – what with all the apparently unnecessary absences. Again, T=this merely asserts that God’s absences are necessary when what’s needed is an explanation for why those absences are necessary. The Atheist challenge is: Can you explain why God is so often absent? And this reply amounts to: No I cannot. But there must be an explanation. Which isn’t victory; it’s quitting.

[Slide 40] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary absence . (b/c God loves us, knows about our needs, wants what’s best for us, and has the power to be with us.) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary divine absence . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Divine Hiddenness There’s obviously a lot more that can be said here, but at this point, I think you can see that most of it will follow the same paths as the problem of evil. The theist needs some sort of theodicy sufficient for rejecting P2. Maybe they can point to Free Will. (“Surely we wouldn’t really be free if God were overbearingly present in our lives.”) Maybe they can point to soul-making. (“Surely we can only grow as people if we feel ourselves alone and required to be self-sufficient, without God’s comfort and aid.”) So that’s an open question that I’ll leave for this week’s discussions. What’s the best way for the theist to respond to the Problem of Divine Hiddenness? The other open question concerns the relationship between this Problem and the Problem of Evil. As we’ve seen, the two problems share a lot of the same essential features and are largely isomorphic. But that raises the question, What’s the relationship between the two? Is divine hiddenness just a specific sort of evil (meaning, therefore, that this problem is just a special case of the broader problem of evil)? Or maybe it’s better to reverse that: maybe all evil is best understood as a kind of divine absence? Or alternatively, maybe the two problems are more like brothers – related but not identical in whole or in part?
