# PHIL 3600 - 10 - The Soul-making Theodicy

[Slide 1] The Soul-making Theodicy

[Slide 2] Recap The Soul-making Theodicy 2 Motivations Objections & Commitments

[Slide 3] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary suffering . (b/c She would know about it, want to prevent it, and be able to) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary suffering . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Evil Possible Responses: Reject P1 Reject P2 Accept C Preferred theist option Recall once more, the shape of the discussion. We have this argument, The Problem of Evil, which observes an incompatibility between the world as it actually is and the world as it should be if the 3-O God exists. Most theists want to respond to this problem by arguing that all of the suffering in the world is necessary – all of it is needed to prevent some greater evil or to secure some greater good.

[Slide 4] The Free Will Theodicy It is consistently worse to violate a human’s free will than to allow evil. Thus, the suffering that stems from human choices is necessary suffering. Last time we looked at the FreeWill Theodicy. It says, roughly, that God knows that human freedom is more valuable than stopping evil. So She lets evils occur whenever stopping evil would require violating someone’s free will. We also looked at some objections to this Theodicy and tried to keep track of all the commitments the theist must make to hold onto her view.

[Slide 5] The Soul-making Theodicy Today we’ll talk about a different theodicy. This one attempts to explain the necessity of suffering not by pointing out what we’d lose through God’s intervention but by emphasizing what we gain by dealing with evil ourselves.

[Slide 6] Motivation #1: God prefers human intervention to divine intervention. I want to offer two different motivations for the soul-making theodicy. The first one picks up on a thread from our conversation last time.

[Slide 7] God could step in to help. But in Her moral perfection, She knows She shouldn’t. You could step in, too. Although far from morally perfect, you know that you should. (and God presumably wants you to!) How do we explain this strange asymmetry? Suppose you live next to a young couple with a baby. As best as you can tell, the couple is gone for 2-3 days at a time, leaving the baby alone at home. You hear it crying through your shared walls. You worry that it’s being severely underfed and under-nurtured. You think about calling child protective services, but you ultimately decide not to.

[Slide 8] The Free Will Theodicy cannot explain this. For both you and God, helping means violating the free choice to ignore the baby. And if freedom is really more important than infant suffering, you must not help. This is what we talked about last time. This asymmetry is a very big problem for the Free Will Theodicy. To accept the Free Will Theodicy is to accept that human freedom is, like, the most valuable thing. But if that’s right, it’s hard to understand why we’d ever be morally required to violate the freedom of others in the name of stoppping evil.

[Slide 9] Maybe God wants to and does help? She uses you as her instrument of assistance. Maybe. But that would imply that God Herself is ready to step in if you refuse. That’s visibly not how these things go IRL. (If no human helps, the baby goes unhelped.) Here’s a different possible suggestion. The problem here is the implication that God is intent on helping. She is definitely going to make sure that the baby is helped. Which,simply, isnt’ true. That is quite clearly not the world we live in.

[Slide 10] Maybe it’s not really about the baby. Maybe it’s about you. Maybe God wants you to grow as a person . (And, frankly, you really need the practice.) So, yes, God could help the baby. But then what would you learn from that? But that suggests yet another possible story. We might think: God doesn’t want to be our safety net. We need to think of our world as our responsibility. If there’s some evil to be stopped, we need to see ourselves as the only ones to stop it. There’re no training wheels in this world. If’ we’re to grow and mature, we have to struggle on our own.

[Slide 11] Soul-making Theodicy Suffering and struggle are necessary in that we need to endure them to secure the greater good of our own maturation, development, & communion with God . So this brings us to the Soul-making Theodicy... Here’s one way to motivate it We say: “All of the evils in the world are actually crises/opportunities. God is inviting us to step in and stop evil for ourselves. She is inviting us to become like her, to work together to make our world and ourselves better.” After all, the 3-O God is already morally perfect. But for you and I to become more like God, we need to practice. It’s like helping your child work on a math problem. It’s simply not very helpful if you do the problems for him. You could do them – you’re pretty good at math, look at you! – but you don’t need the practice. Your kid is the one who needs to practice; he needs to be the one who struggles.

[Slide 12] Motivation #2: Our best science suggests God evolved humans. So that’s the first motivation for the S-m theodicy,. Let me offer another.

[Slide 13] All suffering is the result of Original Sin Recall this (bad) theodicy from a few lectures ago. I didn’t mention this at the time, but one very good reason for rejecting this theodicy is that the story it relies on, when taken quite literally, appears to conflict with our best science. The earth and human beings appear to be far more than 6,000 years old. The Garden of Eden story cannot really explain the necessity of suffering if it’s not true So here’s another path to the Soul Making Theodicy. Think about God as making humans through the process of evolution, as described by our best science. Turns out, when we do that, the Soul-making theodicy starts to look pretty good.

[Slide 14] Imagine you’re the 3-O God before Creation. You’re lonely. It’s just You out here in the big vastness. You hatch a plan to create companions for Yourself. You want them to be intelligent and morally good and religiously sensitive, and you want them to choose You , to enter into communion with You of their own volition. To get at the view, it’s helpful to imagine yourself as the 3-O God. So picture it; it’s the dawn of time...

[Slide 15] Imagine you’re the 3-O God before Creation. You could just create those beings ex nihilo . You could right now make creatures who are smart and good and perfectly devoted to You. But that doesn’t really appeal. You don’t want intelligent love puppets; You want companions. You want to watch them grow and learn and mature and choose to be your friend. To win the love of such beings would be so valuable and precious. So that’s what you set out to do.

[Slide 16] So you design a life-supporting universe Imagine you’re the 3-O God before Creation.

[Slide 17] You let that universe expand and develop

[Slide 18] You begin to coax simple lifeforms into existence on a particular planet, Earth.

[Slide 19] Over billions of years, you let them evolve, producing a rich and diverse world where your chosen creatures will be able to live and flourish.

[Slide 20] Then, at long last, you pull the trigger: proto-humans !

[Slide 21] They walk, talk, think deep thoughts, worry about doing the right thing, and wonder why they exist at all.

[Slide 22] These, finally, are your companions. You give them rudimentary souls and a dim awareness of your divine presence.

[Slide 23] But now what? How do you bring these selfish savanna-dwellers into communion with you?

[Slide 24] Soul-making Theodicy Suffering and struggle are necessary in that we need to endure them to secure the greater good of our own maturation, development, & communion with God . The answer might be...Soul-making! You make the world hard but rewarding. They struggle and fight and suffer and sometimes win and sometimes lose but always get better and wiser and kinder and more loving. Could you, the 3-O God, have made a pleasanter world? Sure. Of course. But that world wouldn’t forge your chosen creatures into loving companions.

[Slide 25] Less evil Visually, the soul-making theodicy is basically saying this. As humankind develops, they tend (generally) toward improvement. They become wiser, less selfish, less evil.

[Slide 26] More virtue

[Slide 27] More closeness to God

[Slide 28] This applies BOTH the development of the human species AND to the development of individual human character. Crucially, this picture isn’t only about the development of the species. It’s also supposed to describe the development of you personally over the course of your lifetime.

[Slide 29] Less evil

[Slide 30] More virtuous

[Slide 31] Closer to God

[Slide 32] Examples & Applications

[Slide 33] How does the soul-making theodicy make sense of the evils of war? Well, war is a bad thing that humans do to each other. But, like all bad things, it presents opportunities for maturation and development. Politicians have a chance to develop into wiser, more restrained leaders; soldiers and civilians into more thoughtful, cautious, compassionate people. Through suffering and struggling, we have a chance to grow.

[Slide 34] Disease, likewise, is a chance for growth. Disease and poor health are hard. They suck. But through that struggle we can learn important things about ourselves. About courage and determination. About humility and compassion.

[Slide 35] Quiz This is a picture of columbia – notice the wealthy high rises pressed right up against the poor tenement buildings. What does the soul-making theodicy say about the necessity of the evils of poverty and income-inequality? Maybe something like this: the fact that poverty afflicts people regardless of their merits teaches us compassion, that bad things can happen to good people (and good things to bad people). It can teach humility and kindness and courage.

[Slide 36] Objections and Implications

[Slide 37] Objection 1 : Many religions claim that people can be damned – i.e. sentenced to eternal posthumous punishment . Why would the 3-O God do that to her friends? Well… She wouldn’t. I think that’s what we have to say. Hell makes exactly zero sense, if you buy the soul-making theodicy. Two problems: (1) The soul-making God would never make a person, then spend a lifetime trying to improve them, and then throw up her hands when the going gets hard and the person resists getting better. She wouldn’t simply quit on someone in the midst of soul-making. (Nor, given her Omniscience and Omnipotence, is it possible for there to even BE a human who She can’t perfect with enough time and effort. God would know in advance exactly what to do to guide this person toward moral perfection and would have the power to make that happen.) (2) The soul-making God would never make a person, try to improve them, and then torture them forever for failing. That’s nonsense. God would know in advance that the person would fail. She created that person after all – and could have made them a little different if she was worried about failure. In her perfect moral character, it’s hard to imagine Her setting someone up for failure like that.

[Slide 38] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. As we did last time, I want to make a list of all the commitments we’re forced to make in defending the Soul-making THeodicy. This is the first one. I personally don’t think this one is that big of a deal, but your mileage may vary. Some people may feel VERY CONFIDENT that there is a hell, and that individuals who go there are tortured forever. The soul-making theodicy is probably not for those people. I actually think, at that point, that the 3-O God is not for those people. If one believes that some humans are tortured infinitely by God for their finite Earthly crimes, then one believes in an afterlife that is plainly and fundamentally unjust. Thus, God is not omnibenevolent. =(

[Slide 39] Objection 2 : Some people mature more than others. What does the 3-O God do with those who die without developing any significant virtue or spiritual maturity? Suppose the world ends tomorrow in a giant extinction event – a big meteor or something. Does God say, “Well, time’s up. Fuck it. Everyone gets an A”? Presumably not. The whole point is to perfect each human. If a person fails to be perfected during her time on earth, then God must continue her perfecting efforts after the person’s death. If you don’t get it done in time, you’re going to have to stay after class.

[Slide 40] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. For many people, soul-making must continue after they die . ANother implication. Again, I don’t think this one is all that tough to swallow. But it’s still worth noting.

[Slide 41] Objection 3 : What about people who die in childhood? Do they finish soul-making in heaven? If that’s an option, then why do some of us have to soul-make on the objectively shittier Earth? Before the advent of modern medicine, about ⅓ people died before the age of 5. Obviously, no 5 year old is a morally perfected being. Thus, we need some sort of story about how those individuals finish soul-making. We have two choices: They finish in heaven They finish elsewhere It’s hard to believe that they finish in heaven. If ⅓ of people die young and get to soul-make in heaven, then the world starts to look patently unfair. ( i want to soul-make in heaven, too! Why didn’t I get to die in childhood?!) It’s hard to imagine the 3-O having such an unfair plan. Which means, those who die in childhood must soul-make elsewhere. There’s only one place we know of that God has carefully designed for soul-making: the earth. Thus, those who die early prolly continue soul-making on earth… meaning, what exactly? One obvious option is reincarnation. Those who die early are sent-back into new bodies and allowed to continue soul-making.

[Slide 42] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. For many people, soul-making must continue after they die . Children who die prematurely continue soul-making on Earth . (reincarnation??) A third implication. Now things are starting to look a little weird. But, still, the Soul-making Theodicy still hasn’t committed itself to anything, like, patently silly or stupid. These first three commitments are mostly just surprising, I think.

[Slide 43] Objection 4 : Doesn’t the cost of soul-making seem… pretty high? Like, my moral development is important, sure, but couldn’t it proceed in a world with just a little less suffering? Do we really need all of these genocides, hurricanes, and diseases?

[Slide 44] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. For many people, soul-making must continue after they die . Children who die prematurely continue soul-making on Earth . (reincarnation??) Every bad thing is absolutely, 100% necessary for soul-making. This commitment is the most troubling so far. It’s not easy in some cases to see how a particular instance of evil could plausibly contribute to soul-making. But it really does seem like the SMT is committed to this. (alternatively, we could combine the SMT with another theodicy to help take up the slack. Unfortunately, the only other promising one we’ve looked at (the Free Will Theodicy) struggles in exactly the same cases)

[Slide 45] Objection 5 : The average life today is far less painful than the average life ~300 years ago. Plus, fewer people die of violence, malnutrition, and infectious disease. Quiz Take a second and think about why this might be troubling. (There are a few good answers here.)

[Slide 46] If suffering is the path to improvement, are we now soul-making slower? Is it bad to, say, give my child Advil? Maybe it’s better to let her suffer/grow? Doesn’t species-improvement slow individual-improvement? Like, if we as a species stop fighting wars, doesn’t that mean that future people will be deprived of all the great soul-making benefits of war? Here’re two of the more troubling implications of this observation. The soul-making theodicy seems to treat all suffering as an important growth opportunity. If a morally-perfect God sees suffering that way, then a morally-perfect human should too. But that means that a genuinely morally good person may sometimes correctly refuse to alleviate the suffering of others . She will say, “Yes your tooth aches, and I could give you a root canal right now, but you’ll grow more as a person if we wait a week, so let’s do that. I don’t want to prolong the amount of time you spend on Earth after all!” Likewise, the improvement of the species seems at odds with the improvement of the individual. Individuals need to suffer to get better while societies need to prevent suffering to get better. The soul-making theodicy makes it hard to understand the elimination of starvation, of war, and of disease as a good thing. Like, obviously it’s a good thing that most people aren’t starving anymore. But the soul-making theodicy seems to suggest that’s… a bad thing? We’ve deprived all those people of a real Growth Opportunity.

[Slide 47] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. For many people, soul-making must continue after they die . Children who die prematurely continue soul-making on Earth . (reincarnation??) Every bad thing is absolutely, 100% necessary for soul-making. Sometimes, the morally perfect thing is to let people suffer for their own good . This one is a little hard to swallow, too, I think. But it does genuinely seem to be a commitment of the view.

[Slide 48] Objection 6 : Sociopathy? Objection 7 : Animal suffering? What do we say about Sociopaths? Almost by definition, it seems, they are unable to soul-make because they are insensitive to or unmotivated by moral reasons. Maybe those people just require lots of reincarnations? But how it that fair? It seems shitty for God to make certain people lack moral compasses and thereby force them to spend even MORE time on the shitty earth. (2) Can we really justify millions of years of animal suffering by saying “Yes, but God really wanted friends”? Think again about Rowe’s fawn, who dies over the course of 3 days all alone trapped under a tree. There aren’t any humans around, so there aren’t any souls to be made better by this suffering. Or, alternatively, maybe we now need to attribute perfectable souls to animals? “God lets the deer die of exposure trapped under the burning tree b/c the deer needs to be morally perfected” That’s a weird thing to say. But that honestly strikes me as more plausible than simply “God kills these animals for US! ”

[Slide 49] Commitments of the Soul-making Theodicy There’s no damnation, and everyone ends up in heaven in the fullness of time. For many people, soul-making must continue after they die . Children who die prematurely continue soul-making on Earth . (reincarnation??) Every bad thing is absolutely, 100% necessary for soul-making. Sometimes, the morally perfect thing is to let people suffer for their own good . Sociopaths are soul-making too? Animal suffering is justified ? (b/c it’s good for us? good for them?) So these are two final, troubling implications of the Soul-making theodicy And our the final question is just this, Considering all these claims together – all of these commitments we’d be making by endorsing the Soul-making theodicy – how attractive is this view? This concludes our discussion of the problem of evil. As always in this course, there’s a lot that’s been left unsaid. There’s more to say about our two main theodicies – and other theodicies to be considered. [next slide]

[Slide 50] P1) If the 3-O God exists, there could never be even one instance of unnecessary suffering . (b/c She would know about it, want to prevent it, and be able to) P2) There has been at least one instance of unnecessary suffering . C) The 3-O God does not exist The Problem of Evil I want to close by making some cursory remarks about the Problem of Evil and what happens from here. You’ll notice, both of our Two Big Theodicies tell the same basic story: They make sense of all the suffering in the world by explaining how that suffering is GOOD FOR US. The Free Will Theodicy says it’s better for us to have freedom of choice than to have freedom from suffering. The Soul-making theodicy says that suffering is a growth opportunity. Any other theodicies we might want to develop will, I suspect, have to follow this same pattern. They will need to explain why all of the suffering we see in the world is good for us. After all, we are the ones who are suffering. So it better in our best interests that we do so. (otherwise, we have a very serious fairness complaint against God. It would be unfair for God to allow us to suffer so that some other beings can benefit. That is a textbook description of injustice. And surely the 3-O God has not set up the world that way.) Thus, future theodicies should focus on this same question: How else might all this suffering be good for us ?
