# PHIL 1000 - 20 - On Organ Sales

[Slide 1] On Organ Sales

[Slide 2] Background Two challenges for opponents of kidney selling Possible objections to kidney sales + replies The Harmless Option Principle and an argument for legal sales Two more objections from Satz Revisiting the coercion concern An argument against the Harmless Option Principle

[Slide 3] A young woman experiences acute kidney failure. She needs a transplant soon, or she’ll die. No matching organs can be found among the available stock of donated kidneys, so her father offers to give up one of his own to save his daughter’s life. This is legal . Most agree that it should be legal .

[Slide 4] A young woman suffers from leukemia. She needs an expensive treatment, or she’ll soon die. Unfortunately, her family can’t come up with the money, so her father offers to sell one of his kidneys to raise the money to save his daughter’s life. This is illegal . Many agree that it should be illegal . A 2015 survey found that about half of Americans oppose kidney sales

[Slide 5] Our Question Can we justify these two stances? (i.e. that organ donation should be legal while organ sales should be illegal?) Also, NO i don’t know why those two kids are making out in the background of this painting. Maybe the standing one is an adult?

[Slide 6] Background

[Slide 7] Kidney transplants have been going on since the 50’s. A person with end stage liver disease is cut open and a healthy, donor kidney is attached to the circulatory system below the original damaged ones.

[Slide 8] We source kidneys from both the living and the dead . This makes kidneys relatively unique. Most kidney donors can expect to live a normal, healthy life post-operation. (which is not true of, say, heart donors!) On average, about ⅓ of transplanted kidneys are from living donors . Humans have two kidneys and can survive with just one The avg kidney donor has undiminished quality-of-life & lifespan

[Slide 9] U.S. kidney shortages are large, persistent, and fatal. About 100,000 people are on the waitlist at any given time. Average wait time is about 5 years Roughly 30,000 kidney transplants are performed annually About 8,000 people die each year in the U.S. while waiting for a kidney The supply of kidneys from dead patients is limited b/c Only ~45% of the U.S. opt-in to organ donation A person must die in a particular way for their kidney to be usable

[Slide 10] In every nation except Iran , kidney sales are illegal. (though many have a robust black market) People in Iran can make $2,000-4,000 selling a kidney. (For comparison, black market kidneys often cost 100X more than that.) Iran does not consistently have kidney shortages.

[Slide 11] Two challenges for opponents of kidney selling Here I follow Radcliffe-Richards. She suggests there are two easy arguments we might give in support of legalizing kidney sales. The challenge for the opponent of kidney selling is to overcome these arguments, to show why kidney selling really is objectionable despite these two arguments in favor.

[Slide 12] For those who think kidneys sales should remain illegal , there are essentially two challenges, (1) Allowing kidney sales would almost certainly save lives (2) Kidney donations are widely regarded as permissible (and the same justification seems to apply to kidney sales .)

[Slide 13] Challenge #1 Kidney sales would save lives Were kidney sales legal, there’d very likely be fewer people dying for lack of a kidney. In general, societies should adopt policies that save citizens’ lives... (e.g. crosswalks, speed limits, suicide hotlines) unless the policy’s bad effects would outweigh the good of saving lives. I say “very likely” b/c there is some economic research that suggests in some cases and in some markets you actually get less of a good when you offer to pay people for it. The people who would have donated for free decide they don’t want to, and only a smaller number decide to sell. So less of the good is available than before. BUT the only country where kidney sales are legal, Iran, is telling on the point: there is no kidney waitlist nor kidney shortage in Iran. Thus, almost certainly: the fact that kidney sales are legal in Iran is saving Iranian lives.

[Slide 14] Challenge #1 Kidney sales would save lives Thus, the kidney selling opponent will need to identify some bad effects of legalizing kidney sales . More specifically, she must claim, “ These effects are so bad that it’s honestly better to let people die. ”

[Slide 15] Challenge #2 Kidney donations are clearly fine But, why? (i.e. why do we think should be allowed to donate their own kidney?) Quiz Think about that for a second. (So, let me clarify first: The question isn’t why is it good to donate a kidney. We’ve already talked about that: it’s good because it can save a life. The question Why are you allowed to donate a kidney? Why isn’t it morally objectionable for someone to cut you open and take out a kidney?)

[Slide 16] Challenge #2 Kidney donations are clearly fine As a first pass, we might say, I’m allowed to donate my kidney for the same reason I’m allowed to donate my hair: it’s mine. Who else would even get a say?

[Slide 17] Challenge #2 Kidney donations are clearly fine We each have a right to bodily integrity – the right to decide whether / when / by whom our bodies may be interfered with. (This right is not about protecting me from bodily interference per se . It’s about ensuring that others interact with it only on my terms .) The Upshot X can interfere with Y’s body if and only if Y gives her valid consent. More precisely, the thought is this

[Slide 18] My right to bodily integrity means you can’t brush my hair without my permission. But it also means my permission is all you need. If you have permission, you can brush my hair

[Slide 19] My right to bodily integrity means you can’t hand-feed my oats without my permission. But it also means my permission is all you need. If you have my permission, you can hand feed me oats

[Slide 20] My right to bodily integrity means you can’t tie me up in a barn without my permission. But it also means my permission is all you need. If you have my permission, you can tie me up in a barn

[Slide 21] I guess, what I’m saying is: My right to autonomy means you can’t treat me like a horse without my permission.

[Slide 22] Challenge #2 Kidney donations are clearly fine Kidney donations are fine because we each have a right to bodily integrity : While a doctor may not extract my kidney without my valid consent , my valid consent is all she needs. But then… Doesn’t that also justify kidney selling ? Hopefully, you can see now why this represents a challenge for those who would oppose kidney selling: If my consent is enough to justify this explanation would seem to imply that kidney selling is permissible too. If my consent is sufficient for letting people take my kidney, then, seemingly, it is sufficient for letting them take my kidney and then give me money in return.

[Slide 23] For those who think kidneys sales should remain illegal , there are essentially two challenges, (1) Allowing kidney sales would almost certainly save lives (2) Kidney donations are widely regarded as permissible (and the same justification seems to apply to kidney sales .) So these are the two challenges facing anyone who would want to oppose kidney sales. To defend the ban on kidney sales, we need to identify some bad outcome of legalizing kidney sales that (a) is so bad, that it outweighs the goodness of saving thousands of lives but (b) doesn’t imply that kidney donation is impermissible. E.g. “It’s immoral to allow kidney sales because some people may regret having sold their kidney” implies that kidney donation is immoral (AND it’s implausible that some regret is worse than letting thousands die.) “We should ban kidney sales because some people may experience kidney problems or other adverse health effects years after the surgery” implies that kidney donation is immoral, too.

[Slide 24] Possible Objections to Kidney Sales Here’s Radcliff-Richard’s strategy: She’s going to try to canvas the possible reasons one might give for objecting to kidney sales and, she’ll argue, all of them seem to fail.

[Slide 25] Quiz Proposal The buying and selling of body parts is morally inappropriate. (that’s why donation is OK but selling is not.) Why doesn’t this work? What’s wrong with this proposal.

[Slide 26] Proposal The buying and selling of body parts is morally inappropriate. (that’s why donation is OK but selling is not.) Reply We allow the buying and selling of semen, breastmilk, hair, plasma, and blood. (So… apparently we don’t actually think this.) Quiz The problem is, basically, that basically no one thinks this is actually true. (You might try, “it’s wrong to sell essential body parts.” But that’s not true either. Blood plasma is essential, but it’s ok (and safe) to sell some of it. In the same way, we might say: kidneys are essential but it’s ok (and safe) to sell some of it.

[Slide 27] Proposal Altruism is an acceptable motive for surrendering a kidney; economic gain isn’t. (that’s why donation is OK but selling is not.) Reply Often a seller is motivated by altruism. (e.g. the man too poor to pay for his child’s meds) Reply We don’t generally think an activity immoral merely b/c people do it for money. (else, most economic activity would be immoral) Quiz

[Slide 28] Proposal The kidney selling market would mostly involve transfers from the poor to the rich (while the donation market isn’t like that.) Reply Not necessarily! We could regulate it. (e.g. the gov’t could buy all the kidneys and re-distribute them without regard to wealth.) Reply Most fancy product markets are like this, but we don’t think those should be banned. (e.g. iPhones, designer shoes, maid services) Quiz

[Slide 29] There is something to this suggestion that it’s the poor who will suffer from kidney sales Maybe there’s something about a kidney market that would make the seller’s consent in valid . Maybe kidney sales are coercive . Many have suggested that a market for kidney will take advantage of the poor. Given our earlier remarks about the right to autonomy, though, we’ll have to say something more substantial than that. Poor people also have a right to bodily integrity. Poor people also get to decide whether, when, and by whom their body is interferred with. We can’t simply say, the poor can’t consent to economic transactions. That’s not true. Of course poor people should be allowed to, say, sell their labor by taking a job. Or sell their crafts on Etsy. Or sell their plasma for some cash. It’s not good that poor people may have to resort to working bad jobs or resort to selling plasma. But it’s confused to say that We can’t simply say, the poor can’t consent to economic transactions. T

[Slide 30] Proposal A poor person may simply have no choice but to sell a kidney . That’s coercion ! (while the kidney donor does have a choice.) Reply That’s just not true. Sellers did choose. It’s just that their alternatives are really awful. (unless, of course, their kidney is literally stolen.) Quiz We can do better than this.

[Slide 31] Proposal Since kidney sellers wouldn’t give up their kidney for free, the sale must be coercive . ( kidney donors obviously do give it up for free.) Reply “Wouldn’t do it for free” is not sufficient for an act’s being coerced . (else I’m being coerced into teaching this course) Quiz We can do better than this.

[Slide 32] Proposal The background conditions of poverty make kidney sales coercive . (poverty doesn’t really influence kidney donors ) Reply If poverty is coercive , that doesn’t mean all choices made while poor are coerced . (else, the poor are coerced into eating lunch, etc) Reply This is not really a case of coercion . Quiz Think about why coercion counts as invalidating consent. Think about what’s going on a coercion case.

[Slide 33] Coercion is a wrongful narrowing of another person’s choices, to pressure them to make a decision they might not otherwise make. To illustrate what Radcliffe-Richards has in mind, lets look at a case: Suppose some kidnappers grab your dog and threaten to harm it if you don’t give them your entire stamp collection. If you give them the stamps, we would surely say that your consent was illegitimate because it was coerced . What makes this a case of coersion? Radcliffe-Richards suggests that it’s coercion because you’re options have been limited in an inappropriate way. The kidnappers artificially and wrongfully narrowing your options: your stamps or your dog. Before you could keep both; now you only get one. That’s coercion.

[Slide 34] Proposal The background conditions of poverty make kidney sales coercive . (poverty doesn’t really influence kidney donors ) Reply Coercion is about being wrongfully denied an option that you used to have. (but kidney sellers now have a new option!) Quiz So this is a second reply to the suggestion that poverty is coercive: when it comes to allowing kidney sales, we’re giving people an extra option, not denying them an option. And, Radcliffe-Richards thinks, this actually suggests a plausible argument is support of allowing kidney sales.

[Slide 35] Think about the dognapper case again. Now imagine that the police show up on the scene and they prevent you from giving up your stamps – perhaps out of some misguided policy that no one should negotiate with terrorists . This is not helpful. You would be pissed at the police and rightly so. By intervening, the police force you to give up your pet where you would have preferred to give up your stamp collection. This is analogous to banning kidney sales. The kidnappers are like poverty. OF COURSE you shouldn’t have to deal with that bullshit – the dognappers or the povery. Of course it’s unjust that you’ve been put in this situation. But given that YOU ARE in this situation, you’d prefer to sell your kidney (or give up your stamps) than remain in poverty (or let your pet be hurt.) A ban on kidney sales is like the police preventing you from giving up your stamps; it’s blocking you from doing what you’d most like to do, given your non-ideal, unjust circumstances.

[Slide 36] “ It is really pretty obvious, as soon as the matter is addressed directly, that increasing someone’s range of options – which is what an offer of payment always does – could not in itself constitute any kind of coercion or restriction of freedom. ” - Janet Radcliffe-Richards

[Slide 37] Harmless Options Principle In general, giving X one more option does not limit X’s freedom nor make X worse off than she was before. (even if the option is deeply unattractive!) Let’s give this idea a name. Radcliffe-Richards is proposing a general moral principle. It’s a pretty plausible one!

[Slide 38] I offer to let you to fax me your exams. This new option is a bad option, of course. None of you would take me up on it, probably. But by giving you this extra option, I don’t seem to limit your freedom in any way nor do I make you any worse off than you were before.

[Slide 39] Subway offers customers a free sandwich in exchange for donating all their body hair. “Shave your body! Get a footlong!” The ad reads. Basically no one takes them up on the offer. BUT, adding this option doesn’t seem to make you worse off or limit your freedom in any way. You can just ignore it! That’s what we do with bad options! We ignore them!

[Slide 40] The CU PHIL Dept starts offering a new course, “The Metaphysics of Manuscripts in Neo-Platonic Thought through the Early Middle Ages” Again, NOT A GOOD OPTION. That class sounds boring as hell. But again – you can just ignore it! Adding this options doesn’t seem to leave you worse off or limit your freedom. And, who knows? Maybe there’ll be a few students for whom this extra course is actually a good thing.

[Slide 41] ??? Quiz Think about it for a second: Can you come up with another case that seems to illustrate the truth of the Harmless Option Principle? (a case where a new option is introduced – one that is genueinly pretty awful – but where it’s clear that no one is worse off)

[Slide 42] P1) Harmless Options Principle – Giving X one more option does not limit X’s freedom, coerce X, or make X worse off than she was before P2) Permitting kidney sales amounts to giving people one more option C1) Thus, permitting kidney sales does not make people worse off (or limit their freedom or coerce them) P3) If permitting kidney sales doesn’t make anyone worse off, kidney sales should be legal . (b/c no one is worse off, and some lives would be saved!) C2) Thus, kidney sales should be legal . The Harmless Option Argument This principle gives rise to a plausible argument in support of legalizing kidney sales.

[Slide 43] Two More Objections from Satz To this point, we’ve been examining the case for legalizing kidney sales, offered us by Janet Radcliffe-Richards. Before we finish out this topic, I want to examine two objections to Radcliffe-Richards position, derived from the article I had you read by Debra Satz. (There’s a lot of really good stuff in that Satz article but, for the sake of brevity and concision, I want to focus on two particular arguments.

[Slide 44] Objection #1 Coercion & Weak Agency

[Slide 45] Recall It does seem initially plausible to think that kidney selling is coercive while kidney donation is not. If so, sales involve invalid consent . But we were unable to pin down how, exactly, sales might be coercive . Quiz So this is a second reply to the suggestion that poverty is coercive: when it comes to allowing kidney sales, we’re giving people an extra option, not denying them an option. And, Radcliffe-Richards thinks, this actually suggests a plausible argument is support of allowing kidney sales.

[Slide 46] Satz Coercion concerns mostly arise under conditions of weak agency . Quiz the situation of a person in a subordinate social position who’s denied her full rights to autonomy & bodily integrity . THAT IS NOT WHAT SATZ SAYS WEAK AGENCY IS!!!! Shit. On second look, she characterizing weak agency as a decision made while not having access to the relevant information (including info about likely future outcomes of one’s decision) At one point she says it involves “full knowledge and considered judgment”

[Slide 47] Your eldery patient has weak agency . He doesn’t have the control he ought to have over his own body and choices . Let me give you an example. Imagine you’re a primary care physician. You have this one eldery patient who always comes in with his son. For the duration of every visit, the son runs the show: he asks you questions about his dad, he answers your questions about his dad’s health, he takes charge of scheduling appointments, picking up medications, and even making medical decisions. As far as you can tell, your elderly patient is perfectly mentally capable – he doesn’t have dementia or anything; he’s just under his son’s thumb.

[Slide 48] Quiz We already see this happening in black markets in some parts of the world. Satz Under conditions of weak agency , we should be worried that decisions to sell a kidney will be coerced . (not by poverty, but by other people.) A person with weak agency is not fully in control of her own body or her life decisions.

[Slide 49] “ [Certain] facts stand out in the Indian cases [involving kidney sales ]: first, an overwhelming majority of those interviewed (79%) regretted their decision and would not recommend that others sell a kidney; and second, a majority of sellers found and interviewed (71%) were married women. Given the weak position of women in Indian society, the voluntary nature of the sales is questionable . The most common explanation offered by wives as to why they and not their husbands sold their organs were that the husbands were the family’s income source (30%) or were ill (28%). Of course, as the authors of the study point out, most of the interviews of women were conducted in the presence of their husbands or other family members , so they may have been reluctant to admit to being forced. ” – Debra Satz

[Slide 50] Satz Under conditions of weak agency , we should be worried that decisions to sell a kidney will be coerced . (not by poverty, but by other people.) Quiz We already see this happening in black markets in some parts of the world. SO, Her argument is this: If we legalize kidney sales in countries where lots of people have weak agency, there is good reason to worry that many of those selling kidneys are coerced. Thus, in those countries, it may be true that kidney selling is much worse than kidney donation and, thus, we may be able to justify a ban. ON THE OTHER HAND, she notes, keeping kidney sales illegal does not eliminate black markets. And insofar as there’s coercion going on in the black markets already, we may ultimately decide we can protect people better by legalizing kidney sales and implementing robust legal regulations and protections.

[Slide 51] Objection #2 Against the Harmless Option Principle

[Slide 52] Satz The H.O.P. is false. Sometimes an extra option really does make people worse off or restrict their freedom. ( but it’s indirect, so it’s easy to overlook.) Recall, the Harmless Options Principle says In general, giving X one more option does not limit X’s freedom nor make X worse off than she was before. (even if the option is deeply unattractive!) Radcliffe-Richards used the principle to argue that allowing kidney sales is just giving people an extra option – and, thus, doesn’t make anyone worse off than they already were.

[Slide 53] The CU PHIL Dept starts offering a new course, “The Metaphysics of Manuscripts in Neo-Platonic Thought through the Early Middle Ages” Recall this case. You think that sounds SO FUCKING BORING. But it’s just another extra option – no worries! Just don’t take it! But now suppose you’re trying to get into one of my courses one semester (Let’s pretend you like me enough to take two of my courses!) You’re stuck on the waitlist, and you email me, Hey, Caleb! I really need to take one more Philosophy course next semester, but I’m stuck on the waitlist for your course. Can you request a manual override? While I might normally agree, in this case perhaps I know that the Metaphysics of Manuscripts class meets at the same time and has a bunch of openings. So I reply, “It’s department policy to direct students to low-enrollment classes before piling them into full courses. Since the Metaphysics of Manuscripts class is still open and has lots of slots, you should take that one instead of my course.” Thus, here’s a case in which giving you one more option actually does, in an indirect way, end up being bad for you and ends up limiting your freedom. Whereas you would have had the option to join my class from the waitlist, now you don’t. I remove that option, one you otherwise would have had, because of this other option that I know that you have.

[Slide 54] The state can cut off benefits to individuals who refuse to take personal service jobs, when available. Quiz Or, recall this point from the Anderson article about Prostitution. How does this case undermine the Harmless Option Principle? Can piece together that argument? Here’s the idea: Suppose sex work is legalized. You now have one more occupational option than you had before – a pretty unattractive option but no matter. You can just ignore it! But the government knows that you have this new option, and they may restrict some of your other choices accordingly. When you lose your job and go to collect some temporary unemployment, the government may say, We noticed you turned down that job offer for sex work. Your call, of course, but that does mean we won’t be giving you unemployment. Unemployment is for people who can’t find a job, not for people who can’t find the perfect job. Here, again, is a case in which giving you one more option actually does, in an indirect way, end up being quite bad for you and limiting your freedom. Whereas you would have been able to both collect unemployment and not take up sex work, now you can’t. The govt removes that option because they are aware that sex work was added to your list of options.

[Slide 55] Satz The H.O.P. is false. A new option can often indirectly undermine or disvalue certain other options, available to you elsewhere. IN the cases I just gave you, other people were aware that you had an extra option and as a result, they offered you fewer options in some other domain or choice situation

[Slide 56] Satz In kidney markets we could see, e.g., (i) Bank agents demanding that you put up a kidney as collateral on a loan (ii) Means-tested assistance programs counting your kidney as an asset (iii) Bankruptcy courts treating kidneys as saleable parts of one’s estate (i) So whereas before you could get a loan without needing to risk your kidney, the addition of this new option undermines your ability to get a loan – thus, you are worse off than you were before (ii) Whereas before kidney sales were legalized you would qualify for a particular assistance program (say, assistance with your monthly energy bill) now that your kidney is counted as a part of your personal wealth, you no longer qualify for the program – thus, this new option to sell a kidney has made you worse off than you were before (iii) Whereas before kidney sales were legalized you would not have to count your kidney as among your estate assets, things to be divided up among your creditors, now it is – thus, this new option to sell a kidney has made you worse off than you were before. None of these are predictions about what the future would necessarily be like! Sats isn’t saying we’d be forced allow this stuff to happen. The point is that these possibiilties undermine the Harmless Option Principle.

[Slide 57] “ Anthropologist Lawrence Cohen (2003) found that in areas of India where kidney selling was widespread, creditors placed additional pressures on those who owed them money. Cohen notes, ‘In the Tamil countryside with its kidney belts, debt is primary ... Operable women are vehicles for debt collateral . ” – Debra Satz But, nevertheless, Satz thinks these possibilty are very real. She cites some evidence from India and Sri Lanka that some of this is already going on.

[Slide 58] P1) Harmless Options Principle – Giving X one more option does not limit X’s freedom, coerce X, or make X worse off than she was before P2) Permitting kidney sales amounts to giving people one more option C1) Thus, permitting kidney sales does not make people worse off (or limit their freedom or coerce them) P3) If permitting kidney sales doesn’t make anyone worse off, kidney sales should be legal . (b/c no one is worse off, and some lives would be saved!) C2) Thus, kidney sales should be legal . The Harmless Option Argument Thus, this is Satz reply to the Radcliffe-Richards Argument. She thinks we should reject P1. (Notice, Satz position is not that we should keep kidney sales illegal. Her position is that Radcliffe-Richard’s argument fails.)
