# PHIL 3600 - 02 - Objections to the Ontological Argument

[Slide 1] Objections to the Ontological Argument

[Slide 2] Three Objections The greatest-possible-island objection The existence-isn’t-a-property objection The sneaky definition objection

[Slide 3] The Ontological Argument

[Slide 4] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument

[Slide 5] As written, the Ontological Argument is valid, so we have 6 options (1) Reject P1 (2) Reject P2 (3) Reject P3 (4) Reject P4 (5) Reject P5 (6) Accept the conclusion

[Slide 6] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible ? C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property ? C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) ? The Ontological Argument Of those 6 options, only 3 of them seem actively viable. P1 seems like a logical truth. (Assuming we’ve done our possible-being metaphysics correctly.) Surely our three categories of being really do constitute a legitimate partition. Those 3 options really do seem to be both exhaustive and mutually exclusive. P3 & P5 are both definitions. It typically doesn’t make sense to say that a definition is false, unless the definition is reporting on the world – unless the definition has an empirical truth value. The def in P3 is a logical entailment. An analytic truth that falls out of the way we’ve described Category 2. Nothing to argue with there. What about P5? Maybe we can argue with Anselm’s def of God? Probably not. In general I think, here and in other cases, it just doesn’t make a ton of sense to argue with a definition.

[Slide 7] Person 1: Let’s stipulatively define a ‘bug’ as a winged insect > 2 cm long . Person 2: What? That’s wrong. That’s not what a bug is. To illustrate why that is, I’ve written you a brief, 1 Act Play. (sometimes, i think, the best way to understand an argument is to imagine it actually coming out of someone’s mouth in a philosophical discussion. So that’s the point of this exercise: I want you to see what it looks like for someone to argue with definitions. PRO TIP: this is a good strategy to keep in your philosophy toolkit. When you’re considering a new view, argument, or objection, it can often be helpful to imagine how that argument or idea would sound in the actual context of a philosophical argument between two people. Very often, I’ve found, that exercise turns up interesting and helpful results. ANYWAY, back to the hypothetical conversation...

[Slide 8] Person 1: Sure, but, just for now, though? Can we use it to mean that for now ? Person 2: No. We can’t. ‘Bug’ doesn’t mean that.

[Slide 9] Person 1: Well, let’s invent a word. ‘Blozon’ means winged insect > 2 cm long . Person 2: No. You can’t just do that! That definition is false, too! THE END Hopefully, you can see: Person 2 isn’t really making sense. There’s nothing illegitimate about temporarily and stipulatively defining terms. And there’s def nothign wrong with making up new words and assigning them new defs.

[Slide 10] Let’s stipulatively define ‘God’ as the greatest possible being . This is what Anselm is doing. It just doesn’t make a ton of sense to argue with him about that. Thus, EVEN IF, you’re inclined to reject Anselm’s definition of God, he can just make up a new word and stick it into argument. If it bothers you that he’s co-opted the word ‘God’, you can simply replace all instances of the word ‘God’ in your head with the word ‘blozon’. Anselm is arguing that the greatest possible being, Blozon, actually exists. (And if you say, “NO. You can’t just do that!” Anselm will just shrug and say, “Fine. Instead of giving this concept a name, I’ll just repeatedly say, “The greatest possible being”. My argument still shows that the greatest possible being exists.)

[Slide 11] Practically speaking, then, we have 3 options (1) Reject P1 (2) Reject P2 (argue that God is impossible) (3) Reject P3 (4) Reject P4 (argue that existence isn’t great-making) (5) Reject P5 (6) Accept the conclusion SO All that’s to say, we seem to have essentially 3 options in how we respond to the Ontological ARgument.

[Slide 12] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible ? C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property ? C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) ? The Ontological Argument Visually, these are our 3 options.

[Slide 13] Objections

[Slide 14] The Greatest Possible Island Obj

[Slide 15] Gaunilo of Marmoutiers (1100’s C.E.) famously argued that we can use the Ontological Argument to prove that the Greatest-Possible-Island exists – thus showing the Argument to be bad.

[Slide 16] The Greatest Possible Island The Greatest Possible Island (GPI) is that island than which none greater can be conceived . Here’s the definition that we’ll be working with in the Greatest Possible Island version of the Ontological Argument. 2 points need to made here. By “great”, we mean “better” or “more admirable” or “more perfect” – God is the perfectest being. Also bear in mind that what’s relevant here is possibility, rather than actuality.

[Slide 17] Things that actually exist A round square A number that’s even & odd A dog that’s taller than itself A married batchelor GPI? Category 1 Category 2 Category 3 Venice Will Smith iPhone 10 Whales GPI? Atlantis Will Smith’s evil twin iPhone 9 Centaurs GPI? Things that don’t exist but could Things that don’t exist and couldn’t

[Slide 18] P1) The GPI is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) The GPI is not logically impossible C1) The GPI is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine it!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, the GPI is the greatest possible island C3) GPI is not a Category 2 entity (else it would lack a great-making property ) C4) So the GPI must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. the GPI actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument – Island Edition

[Slide 19] P1) If the original Ontological Argument is sound, then so is the Island Edition P2) The Island Edition is not sound. (SPOILER – there is no GPI) C) So, the Ontological Argument is unsound, too Gaunilo’s Objection The Island Edition ISNT GAUNILO’S OBJ. It’s just an illustration. This is his actual argument. Important note: There’s nothing special about islands. We could make the same point by picking a different object – a bread machine, a stick, a bazooka.

[Slide 20] P1) If the original Ontological Argument is sound, then so is the Island Edition P2) The Island Edition is not sound. (SPOILER: there is no GPI!) C) So, the Ontological Argument is unsound, too Gaunilo’s Objection Quiz QUIZ: What premise does Gaunilo object to? This is a trick question! Gaunilo isn’t rejecting any of the premises. There’s a sense in which this objection is only ½ of a reply to the Ontological Argument. Gaunilo’s objection seems to show that there’s something wrong with the Argument – there must be! You can use it to prove all sorts of crazy and false things! – but it doesn’t tell us what is wrong. Which premise is he rejecting? What’s the mistake in the argument? We don’t know.

[Slide 21] The Greatest Possible Island Reply – Is the GPI really a coherent, imaginable being? … The GPI, unlike Anselm’s God, is fundamentally a finite being. It is, at the end of the day, just an island! We might wonder, Does it even make sense to talk about an island as being perfect ? It seems coherent on its face, but can we actually imagine such a place? How many squares miles is it? It has to have a size, and that size has to be perfect! So… what’s the size? How many different kinds of fruit does it have? It has to have some number of fruit-bearing species, and that number has to be the perfect one! So… what’s the number? Likewise: what is the sand like? What is the weather like? What is the animal life like? What kinds of natural ores are there? The point is this: As soon as one ties to imagine the specific perfections of the GPI, one is confronted with the fact that it’s not-at-all clear how to make sense of the perfect island size or the perfect number of fruit-bearing species . So this is one thing Anselm might say in response to Gaunilo: God, unlike the island, can actually be coherently imagined, in detail. We can say with some specificity what properties God has. Thus, while the GPI is probably in Cat 3 (an impossible being), God is not.

[Slide 22] The Existence-Isn’t-A-Property Obj

[Slide 23] Immanuel Kant (1724 - 1804) famously argued that the Ontological Argument fails because existence is not a property. (And thus, cannot be a great-making property )

[Slide 24] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible C1) God is not a Category 3 entity (b/c we can imagine God!) P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) Existence is a great-making property C2) Thus, all Category 2 beings lack at least one great-making property P5) By definition, God is the greatest possible being C3) God is not a Category 2 entity (else he would lack a great-making property ) C4) So God must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. God actually exists. ) The Ontological Argument Visually, here’s what Kant’s doing – he’s telling us to reject P4.

[Slide 25] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Kant wants to say something like this. First we should ask: What is a property anyway?

[Slide 26] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Imagine a baby seal.

[Slide 27] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it brown.

[Slide 28] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it small.

[Slide 29] A property is an attribute or quality of an entity that can (conceptually, at least) be gained or lost Now imagine it existing. (Don’t imagine it doing stuff. That’s different. Keep everything the same in your imagination, except add the property of existence.)

[Slide 30] Kant thinks this is incoherent. Existence cannot be conceptually added or subtracted from an entity. Existence is rather a precondition for an entity’s having properties .

[Slide 31] “ ‘Being’ is obviously not a real property ; that is, it is not a concept of something which could be added to the concept of a thing. It is merely the positing of a thing… By whatever and by however many properties we may think a thing – even if we completely determine it – we do not make the least addition to the thing when we further declare that this thing is. Otherwise, it would not be exactly the same thing that exists, but something more than we had thought in the concept; and we could not, therefore, say that the exact object of my concept exists … ” – Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason What does this mean, exactly? Here’s my best attempt at glossing the argument

[Slide 32] A horse is not the same thing as a unicorn . A unicorn = a horse + a new property ( one-horned ) What’s the difference? … The addition of that extra property means horse and unicorn are different things; they pick out different concepts.

[Slide 33] Principle – adding a new property to a concept results in a new concept This example is meant to illustrate a general principle that Kant seems to accept: Namely, when you add a new property to an existing concept, the result is a new concept. (thus, when you add the property one-horned to the concept horse, the result is the new concept unicorn .)

[Slide 34] Kant reasons, If existence is a property , then an existing unicorn is not a unicorn at all. ( Unicorn + new property = new concept ) Obvs, an existing unicorn is a unicorn . Thus, existence is NOT a property . Why isn’t an existing unicorn a unicorn? Remember our general principal: WHen you take a concept and add a new property, the result is a new concept. So IF existence is a property, adding the property to the concept unicorn results in a brand-new concept. (C.F. adding the new property one-horned to the concept, horse, results in a new concept.) But surely an existing unicorn really is a unicorn. (that is to say, surely we don’t think that the concept of a unicorn that exists is genuinely distinct from our concept of a unicorn – not in the way that our concept horse is genuinely distinct from our concept, unicorn. Obviously, Kant doesn’t actually mention unicorns. But this seems to be the essential pattern of his objection. We must deny that existence is a property because were it a property, our concepts of existing things (like existing horses or unicorns or whatever) would be clearly distinct from our concepts of those same things, sans existence. But that’s stupid. An existing horse just is a horse. That’s the same concept. Thus, existence is not a property.

[Slide 35] The Sneaky Definition Obj

[Slide 36] Consider the leprechaun. A clear Category 2 entity.

[Slide 37] Let’s define a new kind of leprechaun. A real-leprechaun , we’ll say, is a leprechaun that isn’t just merely possible but that actually exists. (an R.L. for short)

[Slide 38] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible (we can imagine an R.L.!) C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity – i.e. real-leprechauns exist . The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition So…. obviously that’s bullshit. Something’s gone wrong. This argument is defective. But WHY? What’s the defect? Where did we screw up?

[Slide 39] The mistake seems to be this. We also know they aren’t in Category 1 . (SPOILER: Leprechauns don’t exist) Thus, they’re impossible. R.L.s are in Category 3 . By definition, real-leprechauns don’t belong in Category 2 . It helps to try to assemble our facts about Real Leprechauns in a different order. Fact #1: Real Leprechauns are by definition not in Category 2 Fact #2: There are no leprechauns in reality. So they aren’t in Category 1 Conclusion: Real Leprechauns are in Category 3: the are impossible beings.

[Slide 40] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Ed. Quiz QUIZ: Which premise of the argument should we reject?

[Slide 41] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition Look at premise 2. It looks innocent, but it’s not.

[Slide 42] P1) An R.L. is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) An R.L. is not logically impossible C1) An R.L. is not a Category 3 entity P3) By definition, Category 2 beings don’t have the property of existence P4) By definition, an R.L. is a leprechaun that actually exists. C2) An R.L. is not a Category 2 entity (b/c no Category 2 entity actually exists) C4) So an R.L. must be a Category 1 entity (i.e. real-leprechauns exist. ) The Ontological Argument – Leprechaun Edition Look at premise 2. It looks innocent, but it’s not. Since R.L. are either real or impossible, by definition, when we accept P2 be automatically grant that Real-leprechauns exist. We shouldn’t do that – That’s a mistake! Real-leprechauns are, apparently, impossible. (That’s weird and surprising. They don’t seem impossible! But they are. Because they aren’t real. And they aren’t merely-possible by definition. Thus, the way that we’ve defined real leprechaun forces them into Category 3. It’s not obvous that we’ve done that, just by glancing at the definition, but it’s true. Weird!

[Slide 43] So too with the Ontological Arg. By Anselm’s def, God isn’t merely possible . (at least, if we accept that existence is great-making .) That is, by definition God is either Category 1 or Category 3 . (either real or impossible) But then, we should not accept P2 . It looks innocent, but it’s not. (b/c Anselm’s definition is sneaky .) Anselm is saying, “Let’s define God as real or impossible. Since we can imagine God, God is not impossible. So, She’s real.”

[Slide 44] P1) God is either a Category 1 , a Category 2 , or a Category 3 entity. P2) God is not logically impossible (is not Category 3 ) P3) By definition, God is not Category 2 C) So, God is in Category 1 , is real The Ontological Argument (un-sneaky’d) Not a good argument! No one should accept P2, given the definition in P3. What the R.L. case teaches us is that just because we can imagine something doesn’t mean that thing is possible. We seem to be able to imagine Real Leprechauns, even though they are impossible. (b/c they don’t actually exist and by definition aren’t merely possible.) Likewise, just because we seem to be able to imagine God as the greatest possible being, that doesn’t mean God – as Anselm defines Her – isn’t impossible.
