# PHIL 3600 - 00 - Course Intro

[Slide 1] Philosophy of Religion

[Slide 2] This Week Read the syllabus if you haven’t already. Do the assigned reading (Zagzebski article in EPR ) Take the reading/syllabus quiz Complete the Module 1 lecture quizzes Post on the Discussion board for Module 1

[Slide 3] This course is titled, Philosophy of Religion Today I want to say a bit about the course: what it’s about; what we’ll be doing. And then make a few preparatory remarks to ease us into the first unit. Maybe that doesn’t tell you all that much about what we’ll actually be doing in this course.

[Slide 4] This course is titled, Philosophy of Religion What’s philosophy exactly? What do we mean by ‘ religion ’ ? So I want to say a bit, first, about what ‘religion’ means in context for this course and a bit about philosophy as a discipline (and what it means to do philosophy OF something)

[Slide 5] A religion is, roughly, a collection of beliefs, practices, symbols, texts, or objects pertaining to the relationship between humans and the transcendental, supernatural, or spiritual . We’re going to focus on just the beliefs . This is a really crude definition! The notion is notoriously hard to pin down and this is hardly the most sophisticated definition – But it’s close enough for our purposes today. My point is simply that religions are really complicated and have lots of different kinds of parts. Religions may include particular rituals or specific buildings or special hats or sacred animals. Religions are really complex. THIS class is not about all that complexity. This class is very specifically about religious beliefs. That’s the part of religion that philosophers are best equipped to deal with. (The other bits – the rituals, the symbols, the sacred hats, etc – are also important! They’re just not philosophically important. I don’t have anything philosophically substantive to say about religious hats. But fortunately, there’s this entire other academic discipline called Religious Studies. Those guys study all the parts of religion, not just the beliefs.) So all THAT is to say: here is what is meant by ‘religion’ in the course title: Specially, religious beliefs.

[Slide 6] Crudely, we might say that philosophers are interested in discovering the truth . But that’s obviously too broad… Chemists are interested in discovering the truth (about chemicals .) Linguistic anthropologists are interested in discovering the truth (about human languages .) Let me say a bit about philosophy too, while we’re defining basic concepts... It’s kinda controversial among philosophers how best to characterize philosophy. (Which, if you’ve taken any PHIL classes before will be zero surprising. Pretty much anytime you ask, “What do philosophers think about x?” the answer is “Well, i’s a controversy!)

[Slide 7] More specifically, we might say, philosophers seek to discover the truth about matters that are too general/fundamental for the sciences. Which, obviously, seems to include the truth about religion.

[Slide 8] Does God exist? If so, what is God like? What happens to us when we die? Why does our universe exist at all – what caused it? What spiritual reality is there beyond/behind the physical reality we see around us? Consider these questions,... Most modern religions give us answers to these questions. Each religion tells us what God is like, why we exist, and what sort of spiritual reality there is to the universe. Hopefully, you can see why these religious questions also count as philosophical questions . These are important issues and ones that seem too fundamental for the sciences to gain a lot of traction. (It doesn’t seem like, for instance, we could simply do experiments on God to see what She’s like.)

[Slide 9] The other distinctive feature of philosophy is its methodology . The way that philosophers try to discover the truth is through careful, critical, & systematic thinking and argumentation . This is the philosophical method precisely because philosophers are concerned with questions that aren’t answerable via scientific inquiry. Like, if there’s some question you’re trying to answer and you could either (a) try to answer it by doing an experiment or (b) try to answer it by thinking really hard, You should do the experiment. Scientific methods tend to be faster, better, and more reliable than mere critical thinking all by itself. Philosophers simply work on questions that science isn’t well-equipped to answer.

[Slide 10] The history of philosophy supports this way of thinking about the discipline – i.e. the contrast with science. If you go back and look at ancient Greek philosophy, you’ll quickly notice that a lot of it is actually proto-physics. People like aristotle and Epicurus (who was one of the first to believe in atoms) were all trying to do physics by just, like, thinking really hard. Then, eventually, we realized that you can learn about physics better by doing science about it, by conducting experiments. Thus, physics splintered off from philosophy and became its own scientific discipline. (And, for the most part…) Philosophers no longer do physics from the armchair, and physicists are no longer doing philosophy.

[Slide 11] We see this same pattern in the history of Psychology. Until around the turn of the 20th century, most of the best psychologists were just philosophers: they were trying to figure out how the human mind works by just thinking about it really hard. But, again, we eventually realized that psychology can be studied scientifically – with experimentation and carefully manipulated real-world observation. Thus, psychology splintered off from philosophy. It became its own discipline. (And for the most part…) philosophers are no longer doing psychology, and psychologists are no longer considered philosophers.

[Slide 12] A better title for this course would be, Thinking carefully and systematically about religious beliefs . SO… all of that was to say… This is what we’ll be doing, in the broadest terms. This is what you should expect.

[Slide 13] Some stray remarks about the course

[Slide 14] The suggested prerequisite for PHIL 3600 is 6 hours of prior philosophy coursework. (i.e. 2 classes) I want to mention this upfront because and say a bit about what that means for the course. In the CU PHIL dept, the expectation for a 3000-level philosophy classes like this one is that students will be asked to write original, argumentative philosophy papers – and, the expectation is, the quality of those papers will be reasonably high. Since it’s unreasonable to expect good and original papers from people who’ve never taken a philosophy class before, this class has a suggested prerequisite of 2 prior philosophy classes. I don’t mention this to scare you or even to tell you to drop the class if you haven’t taken any philosophy before! I just want to be clear and upfront about what it means that this is the 3000-level Philosophy of Religion course (and not a 1000-level.)

[Slide 15] Our course (PHIL 3600) has a lot of overlap with PHIL 1600. Ours isn’t a continuation of that course; it’s more like a demanding alternative . The other thing I want to point out: This course does not assume any prior experience with Philosophy of Religion. There’s actually a lower-level course, PHIL 1600, that serves the same function as this course and covers most of the same content, just pitched at a slightly lower level and with less rigorous assignments. And in fact, if you have already taken PHIL 1600, you might want to take another look at the syllabus for this course and decide whether this is a good use of your time. We’ll be talking about a lot of the same stuff that you would have already talked about in PHIL 1600.

[Slide 16] Another thing that I want to mention up front concerns the limitations of this course. The content of this course is largely fixed by the history of Philosophy, as a discipline in the English-speaking parts of the world. As you might expect, though, English-speaking philosophers have mostly been in conversation with the dominant religious traditions of the English-speaking world – Christianity is the big one, but also atheism, Judaism, and Islam. So that means: We’ll be mostly focused on religions that are Monotheistic (i.e. believe in one single divine entity rather than a divine pantheon) and ones where God is depicted as present in our lives and morally good. That describes all of the major Abrahamic religions – Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. But it excludes religions like Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, and Buddhism. We simply won’t have a chance to talk about those religions as much. That said, there are rich philosophical traditions rooted in Hinduism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism! I certainly don’t want to imply otherwise. Only: we won’t be spending much time with those texts. (Most of which, unfortunately, aren’t terribly available in English)

[Slide 17] Our course focus is thinking carefully and systematically about religious beliefs . But that doesn’t really indicate what I want students to get out of the course. Lastly, I want to say a bit right now about what my goals are for this course. ... The first thing I want you to get from the course isn’t actually specific to this course at all. The point of taking philosophy courses isn’t to learn about philosophy – having a lot of philosophy facts in your brain isn’t very helpful. I don’t care about that. You shoudn’t care about that. The point of this course is to hone your critical faculties – your abilities to think, read, listen, speak, and write with clarity, subtlety, and compassion. In philosophy courses, you hone your critical faculties by practicing doing philosophy. In this course, we’ll be practicing doing philosophy by talking about Philosophy of Religion in particular. So that’s the first thing I want you to get out of the course. But there’s a second thing that I want students to get from this course that is specific to PHIL of Religion. To explain what that is, it might be helpful to reflect a bit about religious beliefs.

[Slide 18] Religious beliefs can be difficult to talk about b/c many people feel very strongly about religion – both in the confidence sense and in the personal identity sense. ... Thus, when you challenge someone’s religious beliefs, you meet two kinds of resistance: First, they are resistant because they are really quite sure that their own beliefs are true. (i.e. your challenge hits them with the same force as a impassioned defense of Flat Eartherism. Which is to say, they don’t actually take it very seriously, because they already think they know what’s up) Second, when you challenge a person’s religious beliefs, they are often resistant because they identify with their religious beliefs. And, thus, challenging their beliefs means challenging who they are and how they see themselves in a pretty fundamental way. As you might expect, that sort of challenging is threatening or, at best, uncomfortable.

[Slide 19] As some evidence for this, we can simply point to all the extreme choices that people make merely because of their religious beliefs. People have, historically, been very willing to go to war for purely religious reasons.

[Slide 20] People are willing to adopt really radical, alienating, and inconvenient lifestyles because of their religious convictions

[Slide 21] People are willing to expend absurd amounts of money, time, and effort on their religions. … Again, all of this is to say: people feel very strongly about their religious beliefs. So strongly that they do pretty radical things like go to war, build palaces, and refuse to use cars.

[Slide 22] Not only to people feel strongly about their religious beliefs , they also vehemently disagree with one another It would be one thing if everyone felt strongly about religion but ALSO everyone belonged to the same religion. In that world, where everyone is on the same page, religious conversations probably wouldn’t be that challenging. But that’s not the world we live in! Different people belong to different religions and those different religions genuinely contradict each other. Many of the things that a Christian believes to be true about religion are incompatible with the things that a Buddhist believes to be true. And, of course, to make matters worse, everyone is VERY CONVINCED that they are right and everyone else is wrong.

[Slide 23] " Spread love everywhere you go... Be the living expression of God's kindness. " – Mother Teresa " By fighting the Jews, I am doing the Lord's work. " – Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf Thus you get, on the one hand, people like Mother Teresa advocating kindness and love in the name of her religious convictions… And, on the other hand, people like Hitler advocating genocide in the name of his religious convictions.

[Slide 24] Here’s a breakdown of the current religious situation in the world….. A lot of that “all others” category is folk religions – China’s folk religions in particular are pretty big, account for about 5% of the 6.4% total What’s interesting to note about this chart is that no religion has a majority of the population . The biggest one, Christianity, doesn’t even have a third. And what that means is , No matter what you believe, MOST PEOPLE IN THE WORLD ARE VERY CONVINCED THAT YOU’RE WRONG. Let me just repeat that one more time for extra emphasis ^

[Slide 25] One of the goals for the course is to get you to take other people’s religious beliefs more seriously. All of that is pre-amble to my second goal for this course: … Not to change your minds, but to encourage you to be less confident that everyone else is wrong about religion and that you’re right. Or, to be less confident that everyone else is so incredibly stupid for believing what they believe. Put differently, lots of people have the following concerning intellectual trait: when they find out that another person disagrees with them about religion, they take that as some evidence that that other person is stupid. That’s obviously not great, for a lot reason. It’s not charitable, of course, but I’m not sure that inference is even well-founded. One of my goals this semester is to move some distance toward demonstrating that that inference is not very well-founded.

[Slide 26] Some humbling thoughts for atheists … 45% of Americans (and 98% of Pakistanis!) think it’s impossible to be an atheist and have good values . To that end, let me quickly point to a couple facts that, I think, should give both sides some pause… That’s kinda kinda concerning. Lots of religious people think not only that atheists tend to be bad people – they think that atheism is incompatible with being a good person . That belief (that atheists are necessarily bad people) would have to be abandoned, of course, if they ever met a morally decent atheist. So… it’s maybe telling that so many religious people haven’t abandoned that belief. (it means they haven’t met any decent atheists!) Yikes!

[Slide 27] Some humbling thoughts for atheists … the most atheist-leaning demographic group, and by a wide margin, is young, white men. (which, no offense none taken, isn’t widely known for being The Most Enlightened Social Group .) Another concerning fact... If we made a list of all the beliefs that Young, White Men hold in greater numbers than other demographics (i.e. a list of beliefs that are most distinctive of young white men) that list would include a lot of… not-flattering stuff. Looking at that list would be like, “Gross Belief, Weird Belief about Sex, Atheism, Kinda Scary Belief, Another Gross Belief.” etc

[Slide 28] Some humbling thoughts for theists … In the U.S., 72% of people keep the same faith they grew up with. (and that’s low compared to other countries!) That is to say: pretty much everyone is every country grows up to hold the same religious beliefs as their parents. Basically no one converts between religions. (Relative to other countries, the U.S. actually has a lot of religious conversion going on. 28% of people convert. In other countries it’s more like 5%.) This is concerning for at least two reasons: First, it means for our Christian friends: if they’d been born in Iran, they’d be Muslim. That’s not a great sign that your religions is true! While most religions claim to be the one, true religion, it looks like no religion has much success at convincing outsiders of that. That’s not promising! We normally expect for the truth to be more successful at spreading than falsehoods. Second, it’s not a good sign that most people simply hold onto whatever views they were taught when they were 5. The fact that everyone still believes whatever they did in Kindergarten does not suggest that people are being particularly clear-headed and rational about these things.

[Slide 29] Some humbling thoughts for theists … Only ~15% of philosophers are theists . (i.e. the people whose literal job is to think about these questions carefully and for decades are pretty unanimous on this one.) Finally…. That’s not to say you should just believe whatever the philosophers believe! In fact, philosophers would be the first to tell you that you should think through these issues for yourself and come to your own decision. But – the fact that the people who think about these questions the most are pretty unanimous is not a great sign for theists. Philosophers, as a group, don’t agree about much, but they mostly agree about this.

[Slide 30] Arguing about God’s existence

[Slide 31] Does God exist? If so, what is God like? What happens to us when we die? Why does our universe exist at all – what caused it? What spiritual reality is there beyond/behind the physical reality we see around us? Look at these religious questions again. These questions are hard because we can’t simply inspect God the way that we might inspect a moose or a boulder. God’s properties and nature seem hidden from us. We can’t obviously do experiments on God or test her with our instruments. and yet – All major modern religions claim to have answers to these questions. Which is interesting! And it raises a philosophically substantive question: Where are those answers come from? What is the source of this religious knowledge? Where’s the evidence coming from?

[Slide 32] Option #1 – Divine revelation Most religions claim to have access to divine revelation. They claim that, at some point, God or one of her agents revealed the truth to us. On this view, we know what God is like because She told us! (Obviously, God didn’t literally tell you and me. We’ve never spoken to God. But supposedly She DID talk to some other people awhile ago, and they told the rest of us.) But this view raises a number of tough philosophical questions. For instance, Why did God reveal the truth to some people directly but not to everyone? How do we tell whether a person who claims to have received divine revelation actually received some or is just lying or hallucinating? Is it ever rational to believe someone who claims to have received divine revelation? (like, what if your good and trustworthy friend Mike claims to have spoken to God. Is it rational to believe him? If not, why should you believe someone like the Prophet Elijah whom you don’t know AT ALL? And if it IS rational to believe people who claim to have received divine revelation, which people should we believe? (For instance, Mormons think that Joseph Smith received divine revelation. Muslims don’t think that. Who’s right? How do we tell?)

[Slide 33] Option #2 – Direct access to religious information Quiz Recall, the question: Where is this religious evidence coming from? Some religions claim that we have something like spiritual eyes that can “see” into the spiritual realm and collect information (in much the same way that our physical eyes collect information from the physical ream) Other religions claim that we each have a personal relationship with God, which is another connection to the transcendent reality and another source of information about religious matters. QUIZ Question: (brief description of how this is going to work for the rest of the semester) This option also raises a number of tough, philosophical questions. Think about it for a second: what philosophical questions does this answer give rise to?

[Slide 34] Option #2 – Direct access to religious information Some philosophical questions I came up with: Does everyone have this religious sense? If so, why do millions of people earnestly claim to have no religious experiences or spiritual sensations? If not, why not – why don’t we all have this ability? Is it something you have train? Is it something that a rare handful are born with? If so, why is that? ALSO, if we can directly inspect God with our spiritual senses, then why is there so much disagreement about what God is like? (c.f. There isn’t much disagreement about what camels are like. That’s because we can directly inspect them with our senses) AND why should we think that the people who claim to be directly sensing God are actually sensing God – and not simply delusional? (c.f. some people claim to be able to directly sense ghosts. We mostly don’t believe those people.)

[Slide 35] Option #3 – Reasoning Other religious people also claim that we can answer these questions about God (e.g. What is God like ?) by using our reasoning ability. That is, they claim that we can answer religious questions simply by thinking really hard and really carefully. (Or, sometimes, religious people say we don’t even need to do that much! They claim that the truth about God is obvious . You don’t need to think hard about it, just think for like a second and you’ll immediately see that God is exists.) This view is even more philosophically rich than the other two! One great thing about reasoning and argumentation is that they are really easy to share. So, on this view, the evidence for God and religion is publically available . That’s interesting - we should look at that evidence. Are those arguments any good?

[Slide 36] That’s what we’ll be talking about for the first part of the course. What arguments can be offered for the existence of God? (and are those arguments any good?)

[Slide 37] We should be thoughtful about what we’re really looking for from theistic arguments . Like, what is it fair to demand of these arguments / what does success look like? The obvious answer is, We’re trying to figure out whether God exists – and, if these theistic arguments any good, success looks like is Arguments that successfully persuade non-theists to believe in God. But I don’t think that’s actually true. As we’ve seen, most people feel super confident about their religious beliefs, most people deeply identify with their religious beliefs, and very few people ever actually end up changing religions. So: I don’t think it’s particularly fair OR realistic to think that a few abstract, philosophical arguments are going to change already-settled minds. We should not, I submit, approach these arguments with that attitude – i.e. expecting theistic arguments to be either wholly persuasive or stupid failures. (I’ve had lot of atheist students approach them that way in the past! I think it’s a mistake. It also tends to makes course conversations feel really hostile. Which sucks.)

[Slide 38] We might usefully distinguish 4 groups of people, (1) Theists , who firmly believe that God exists (2) Atheists , who firmly believe that God does not exist. (3) Settled Agnostics , who firmly believe that God’s existence is unknowable (4) Searching Agnostics , who’re unsure what to believe about God’s existence Let me suggest instead: What you should expect from these arguments depends on your own pre-existing religious commitments … I distinguish groups (3) and (4) because there’s an important ambiguity in how people use the agnostic in everyday English. Some people claim to be agnostic in the sense that they aren’t sure whether God exists. They are on the fence or conflicted about their religious beliefs. But other people claim to be agnostic in the sense that they are sure that questions about God are unanswerable. That’s an important difference! The Settled Agnostic is confident in her religious beliefs (or confident in the lack thereof) – in much the same way that a theist or an atheist is confident. Obviously, of these groups, only the people in (4) are realistic targets for persuasion – the other groups are already religiously committed. A theist isn’t trying to figure out whether God exists. He’s already convinced She does – and, thus, won’t be persuaded to a position he already accepts. Likewise, an atheist and a settled agnostic aren’t trying to figure out whether God exists. The atheist is already convinced She doesn’t – and, thus, isn’t open to persuasion – the settled agnostic is already convinced that it’s unknowable – and, thus isn’t open to persuasion. I submit: how you approach this unit should depend on what your existing religious commitments are.

[Slide 39] We might usefully distinguish 4 groups of people, (1) Theists , who firmly believe that God exists (2) Atheists , who firmly believe that God does not exist. (3) Settled Agnostics , who firmly believe that God’s existence is unknowable (4) Searching Agnostics , who’re unsure what to believe about God’s existence Quiz Easy quiz question: (More like a poll than a quiz) Which of these groups do you most identify with right now? (Strictly speaking, there’s at least a 5th possible group: some people don’t have any beliefs about God b/c they don’t give a shit. Hopefully that’s not any of you. HOPEFULLY because that’s gonna make this course kinda painful for you, I expect.)

[Slide 40] What is it fair to demand of these arguments / what does success look like? Probably, it depends on your religious commitments. Looking at that list, it seems that only searching agnostics can reasonably be expected to be persuadable here. (And, judging from past classes, not many of my students fall into that category! Most of you are probably already religiously committed!) Again, recall our earlier observations: most people feel super confident about their religious beliefs, most people deeply identify with their religious beliefs, and very few people ever actually end up changing religions.

[Slide 41] Some questions for theists ... Can my religious beliefs be supported by good arguments? If so, which beliefs? If not, on what does my faith rest? (Divine revelation? Religious experiences?) To what extent does it seem like people might reasonably disagree about the success of these arguments? So let me suggest for each group, some different questions to focus on. For those of you who consider yourself to be theists, maybe approach our theistic arguments with these questions… RE: Q1b: e.g. as we’ll see later, some theistic arguments purport to show that God created the universe, but they don’t show that God loves you. Thus, your belief in God-as-creator may be backed by good argument but your belief that God loves you may not be.)

[Slide 42] Some questions for atheists … (and settled agnostics ) Which theistic arguments seem most plausible? What sorts of (empirical or theoretical) commitments must one make in order to confidently reject those arguments? What sorts of evidence could persuade me to take theism more seriously? For those of you who consider yourself to be A theists (or settled agnostics), maybe approach our theistic arguments with these questions… Keep these questions in mind, both groups, as we move into looking at our 3 main theistic arguments in the next few weeks. (And as you have a chance to discuss these arguments with one another.)
